Welcome to this lecture series on Power Over People. For this revised, expanded, new edition of our lecture series, I've prepared substantial written materials to supplement the lectures. And these include not only outlines of the 16 lectures, but commentary on the texts that we'll use, analysis of the concepts that we're discussing, and other study aids. And I'll be referring to these materials as we proceed. So let's look then at the outline for this first lecture on the Hindu vision of life. We begin with Hinduism and ancient Indian philosophy this time because it was this mode of thought that developed the novel idea that to exercise power over other people, we should first acquire power over ourselves. That is, self-mastery, self-control through self-knowledge became a prime ideal of this way of thinking. Now this ideal of the quest to know thyself, which of course later became a key axiom of ancient Greek philosophy, was conceived in India around 1500 BC. And the foundations of the ideal rested on what I've given in our outline as four major concepts of Indian idealism. We want to examine these four major concepts, but first let's ask the question, what is idealism in this context? Well, it's the theory that we should be guided in our behavior by ideal standards of conduct. These standards set goals for us of how we should behave. They try to raise our behavior, to uplift us, to attain higher ways of knowing and of being. The Hindu philosophers, like Plato much later, believed that such standards were as essential to our conduct as, say, an A-plus standard is to education. And the point about these ideal standards is that the ideals need not be realizable to be valid. This is a point that Plato is to emphasize and that the Hindus first conceived. For example, let's take the A-plus. I've been teaching for 31 years now. And in all that time, as I begin a course, I have a goal. And that goal is that all of my students will get an A-plus. And I have that goal because the students themselves, each of them, have that goal. And of course, some do get an A-plus. But in fact, never among the dozens of classes that I've taught, political theory being some of them, never have I had a class in which a large majority of students got an A-plus. Even a large minority of students got an A-plus. And I'm beginning to conclude now, after that experience, that the A-plus standard is unrealizable for a whole class. Even so, everybody in that class, including myself, shoots for that A-plus standard. It is an ideal. And that's just one example of the variety of standards that the Hindus and later the Greeks conceived in terms of ideal norms for human conduct and human behavior. The Greeks asked not only, as the Hindus did, about ideal standards for education. They asked, for example, what is an A-plus for a love relationship? Or an A-plus for a diet? Or an A-plus for a given form of work? And Plato's argument as an idealist is that even though that A-plus standard that is defined in one's imagination as right and good and true may not be realizable, nevertheless, it has a validity. And the validity is that just as all my students aim for that A-plus, so we aim for an A-plus in our work or in our love relationship, even though we might not be able to attain just that standard. The standard has then that degree of realizability. It serves to uplift us. It serves to give us the high expectations that we need, a target to aim at. This is idealism. And we begin with Indian philosophy because it anticipates Plato's idealism, which we'll be focusing on in the fifth, six lectures in this series. Now, the first ideal that we must consider, I think, when we talk about Indian philosophy is an ideal that's not discussed shockingly in philosophy much today. And that is the ideal of education and of teaching itself. But it seemed to me eminently appropriate in this lecture series on superstar teachers to point to those teachers who indeed were the first superstars. They came out of the Indian tradition and they were called gurus. Now, the whole term guru today, it seems to me, is suspect. We think of a guru as either a mystic who is completely out of touch with reality or perhaps a potentially abusive person or whatever. We can't conceive often of the essence of this ideal at the heart of being a guru. And that is the essence of the teacher's example and the example that the teacher must set for the student, the relationship between the teacher and the student. I think the idea is captured very well in this book that I've cited in our outline by Karl Potter called Presuppositions of India's Philosophies. Karl Potter talks about in the beginning, the first chapter, this ideal of education in ancient India, in Indian philosophy. And he says this, the traditional ideal of the guru or the teacher requires the teacher in ancient Indian thought not only to have mastered the variety of subject matters included in the curriculum, but also, and more important, to have such insight and superior awareness as to be always cognizant of his pupil's innermost needs as well as master of the exactly appropriate ways of satisfying them. Now, that's an extraordinary expectation for a teacher to have. And again, to emphasize, to be always cognizant of his pupil's innermost needs as well as master of the exactly appropriate ways of satisfying them. That ideal for a teacher is, it seems to me, seldom even posited today, much less approached or realized. In my class, which is often quite large at Barnard College, I kind of beg the question at the outset by saying, well, the class is too large, and I certainly won't be able to get to know each one of you well enough to achieve anything like this. But the Hindus did not do that. They insisted on a kind of education which was a one-to-one relationship and the guru would enter into this relationship with the student and attain a relationship which did allow, presumably, the teacher to come close to this ideal, never to attain it fully, but to be cognizant of the pupil's innermost needs. Even though at the outset we cannot imagine that being fulfilled in our present system of modern education with the mass kind of audiences that we often have, even though that's the case, we maintain it as an ideal. It was achieved, it seems to me, in large part by Socrates, and we'll be talking about Socrates later on in the fourth lecture. But for now, we want only to note this, and that is that the Indians set forth this ideal requirement for the teacher. And teachers ever since, it seems to me, while they may well not think of themselves as gurus, should try to emulate this particular part of the ideal, and that is to practice what they preach, to enter into a relationship with a student that allows that kind of intimacy, so that the student will know that the teacher takes the course matter, the curricula, seriously, but above and beyond that, that the person of the teacher is considerably important. The teacher is indeed on this quest that the Hindus talk about, a quest for what course of life is best. But much more about that later. Education, then, and teaching. That, it seems to me, we define as the first, the foremost quality, the beginning of Indian philosophy. And while it's often passed over, to stress it here is appropriate in this series because we are concerned with teaching and with quality of teaching. And let us note this, that 1500 B.C., the Indians began with this particular premise of its primacy. Now, the second concept that we're talking about here in our outline is of an ideal system of values that education should impart. And let's look at the outline in terms of what it sets forth. The values in Hindu terms are first, artha, the value of wealth and property, kama, sensual, especially sexual pleasure, dharma, religion, duty, imparting a sense of righteousness and rightness about one's conduct, and finally, moksha, spiritual liberation, freedom from illusion, from fear, from ignorance, leading to perception of the highest truth, which is the unity of all being. And I've said that this theory of values insists that all four of those listed constitute broad aims of life, but these four are not of equal worth. Artha and kama are less important than dharma and moksha, the highest state of spiritual consciousness. And this state is attained when we're freed from delusion, from distracting illusions by perceiving oneself in all being and all being in oneself. And that verse from the Bhagavad Gita I'll be mentioning in a moment. But first let's recall a story from one of the Upanishads. The Upanishads rank with the Bhagavad Gita as being part of the canon of Hinduism. And in one of the Upanishads, one of these great spiritual texts, in the Chandogya Upanishad, there's a story about an individual, on a quest perhaps, but it's a simpler example and situation than that. The individual comes into a room, and the room happens to be darkened. The darkened room contains something that that person needs, and he's desperate then to obtain that. But as he walks into the room, he sees an object over in the corner, and the object looks to him suspiciously like a snake. And so in fear, he withdraws from the room. He must get that, what he needs inside, soon. So he waits until there's more light. He walks into the room again, and he sees the object in the corner. He's not so sure that it's the cobra that he first suspected. And so, not sure, anxiety, fear, withdraws from the room, waits until there's much more light. And now he goes in and he sees that what he feared was the cobra, was in fact a rope hanging in the corner, and he can go in and get what he needs. Now that story, told and retold in Hinduism, is illustrative, of course, of the way in which illusion inspires within us fear. And those illusions that we have are all around us every day. We may suspect that there is that snake, that cobra, somewhere. But in fact, it's only an illusion. And once we become, through light, through more light, aware of the reality of the situation, then the Hindus believe we'll understand that evil, that sin, themselves are illusions. They're products only of the fear and the anxiety that we bring to a particular situation. And as we bring that fear and anxiety to any situation, we cloud over that situation. And there's so much within it that is cloudy, that it awakens in us a sense of, and this is their main point, of course, of separateness. As I approach you at any particular time, I'm fearful of you, perhaps, because of the baggage that I bring to that situation. But once more light is shed on the relationship between us, then the fears are absolved, and I'm able to enter into a relationship based upon truth and intimacy. And that truth is what we're after. It's a truth of unity, it's a truth of harmony. The illusion is of separateness. As the Bhagavad Gita says when it talks about the enlightened person, arming himself with discipline then, because self-knowledge comes only with discipline, he sees everything with an equal eye, because he sees the self in all creatures, and all creatures in the self. So the disciplined man grasps the oneness of life. Now that passage from the Bhagavad Gita, cited over and again by Mahatma Gandhi, for example, in his treatises on Hinduism, that passage has influenced modern Hinduism more than any other single element in the religion. In the philosophy it means this, that there is such a thing as unity of being, that the highest truth is when we manage as individuals to perceive oneself in all being and all being in oneself. And once that is achieved, once the separateness is overcome, then illusions will be overwhelmed as well. And that's the task. Now, as these four values are stated here, karma, dharma and moksha, we see that they are arranged in terms of the first being of least importance, because it's that that creates an illusion, the illusion that property is of some importance. The value of wealth and property have their indispensable quality in life, of course, they are of some importance, but not of as much importance as we tend to give them. And so as we move through life, our attempt is, sure, at first to acquire some wealth and property, but then as we learn that these are transient values, values indeed that separate us, as one class is separated from another class, we overcome our sense of the primacy of those values and move on to others. Now, the second value is that of karma. The Hindus are sometimes put down as stern Puritans because of the stringent diet codes, for example, that they have. But the ideal of karma here is highly respected in Hinduism for a certain stage of life, at a certain period of time in one's development. And that idea of karma, of sensual, especially sexual pleasure, is highlighted in the Kama Sutra, which manages to portray graphically perhaps every sexual position imaginable. You look at temples in India, take those graphic sexual postures and place them in, for sometimes tourists, shocking appearance. That kind of emphasis on this particular value at a certain period of time in one's life, then is stressed. So let not anyone say that the Hindus have somehow overlooked this idea of sexual or sensual pleasure. It's there. It's just that we must move beyond it. And as we move beyond it, we come to the next value of dharma. And dharma, as I said, means duty or a religious sense of obligation leading to the value of righteousness. Now, that ideal of dharma should guide us throughout our lives. But as we progress in our development and knowing ourselves, we become more aware of that value. And we take it on ourselves to fulfill the responsibility of the society. And it seems to me that one aspect of Hinduism that is often ignored but needs to be emphasized now as we emphasize rights so much, is that the Hindus say, and Gandhi said this over and again, that rights are necessary. Human rights, obviously, essential. But rights flow, Gandhi said, from responsibilities. And we must perform these responsibilities and duties first before we assume rights as natural to all of us. If we emphasize that, it seems to me, in our disquisitions on human rights, which are around the world set forth by Americans and often other countries are advised on how they must behave according to a certain human rights doctrine conceived in Washington, if we emphasize that responsibility is first essential before one attains these rights, then we'll capture, I think, an important value in Hinduism. So dharma means the performance of duty, responsibility, in a religious and a moral sense. After that, the value of moksha. And moksha, as indicated here, is spiritual liberation. It's a kind of freedom that we have, it seems to me, trouble with. In our culture, we often think of freedom as the British liberals like John Locke and John Stuart Mill thought of freedom as freedom from something. That is, we are free insofar as, for example, I can walk through that door because it's not locked. There's no obstacle there. But there's another kind of freedom that the Hindus conceived, and that is freedom to achieve something. Any one of you can walk through that door right now. You, thankfully, remain seated here because you wish to further your spiritual liberation, your quest for truth and for self-knowledge, and therefore you don't leave. And that choice to attain one's liberation through knowledge, overcoming illusion and ignorance, remaining, studying, that choice is a kind of freedom from the Hindu point of view. It's a freedom from ignorance, freedom from illusion. And that sort of freedom, it seems to me, needs to be emphasized in our culture when we often think of freedom as nothing more than the freedom, the ability to overcome a particular obstacle. The obstacle here can be ignorance. And as we strive to gain freedom of this sort, this sort of spiritual liberation, not merely political or social freedom, but spiritual liberation, the task is to attain that, indeed, sublime goal. If we attain that goal of moksha, then we have achieved a sense of connectedness, of the unity of being, because we are free to move among individuals and understand that we are part of one another. Now, the next set of values that we've listed under the second concept is that of ideal stages in an individual's life. The Hindus were among the first to conceive of life as a journey, as a grand journey. And that's been repeated over and again when we get to the comments that we'll be making about Socrates and his concept of the Socratic quest. We'll see that very clearly. The individual in life ideally moves through various stages of development. And those stages of development begin with brahmacharya, as noted here, that is the student stage, the first 25 years of one's life, ideally, devoted to studying all knowledge and understanding the sacred texts of Hinduism. After that, grihasta, that is the householder stage. Notice that's ages from 25 to about 55, in which the individual establishes a family and becomes devoted to providing for others, for raising children. And so that key portion of one's life is necessarily then committed to one's society, to fulfilling one's social responsibility. But then there's the prospect, notice, of liberation here. And in the third of the stages, vanaprastha, the individual is encouraged to sever his or her ties with society.

and to move off into a realm of solitude in which one searches in the most serious manner possible for one's connection with truth, with the divine. And so the term literally means forest hermit. There aren't that many forests easily available in India today, and so people sometimes go into monasteries, but whatever. One finds a place of solitude, of silence, where one will not be disrupted in one's thought by endless distractions of property and family. Now this solitary seeker of truth, then, begins when one fortunately sees the son of a son. That is, at age 55, one is especially blessed, one has produced a grandson, and this ensures the continuity of the family, the individual begins the search for truth, which must involve, reading from the outline, leaving all family responsibilities behind in a quest for self-knowledge. It's a very serious business in India when one cannot easily in Western society, or at least find philosophical sanction for this, say goodbye to one's family and to society and say, I'm off on my inner quest. Notice that, note it carefully, because when we get to Greek philosophy, we'll note that the inner quest must be taken on within the state, because as Plato and Aristotle will both insist, we are political animals. And as political animals within the state, then we will achieve through the state's cooperation and support, perhaps a degree of self-knowledge and a virtue, but the state is the agent of virtue. The state is, from Plato and Aristotle's point of view, then, the socializing force. And so, vanaprastha is not a stage that is accepted by the ancient Greeks, by Plato and Aristotle. It is not seen as appropriate, from Plato's point of view, to simply say goodbye to one's polis or one's state and go off into the forest. And Aristotle says, in the politics quite clearly, that one is always a political animal unless one is either a beast, an animal, or a god. And there aren't many, in the polis, beasts around who qualify as humans or gods. And so, therefore, Aristotle says, for the most part, the vast majority remain in the state in this quest. Now, why is it that the Hindus don't see it this way? Because they see the state as an enemy. They see the politics as a distraction. And so, the state and politics must be overcome, must be transcended, and the vanaprastha stage allows for this. It gives us an opportunity to get away from, as Thoreau would say, this obnoxious state that's an alien being. And that, from the Hindu point of view, is utterly essential. Once again, it's an ideal. Remember, these ideals are not attained by most people in society anymore. Most of my students, unfortunately, don't get A+. It's not attained by most people. It's an ideal, though, that nevertheless remains there and underlies, it seems to me, much of the Hindu suspicion of politics. And we'll be getting to this later when we talk about the fourth of our concept, the ideal relation between the individual and society. There is, in Western tradition, believe it or not, much more trust in politics in the state than there is in the Indian tradition. And that's because of people like Plato and Aristotle who said that we are political animals. And that distrust was clear, that trust in the state, and belief in the state by most people, was clear in the 60s, when hippies were condemned for copping out and leaving the society. They were practicing, these hippies, the vanaprastha stage in a certain sense. Maybe not all of them, they weren't all on a quest for self-knowledge, but nevertheless they were saying no to the state because the state wouldn't help them in their particular journey. In this journey, and we emphasize the concept of journey here, in this journey then the third stage is necessary. Necessary for what? To attain the fourth stage, of course. And the fourth stage, which bears close analysis, is that of sannyasa. First of all, the meaning of sannyasa, it means saintliness, and it depends upon the result of vanaprastha, and it is inextricably interwoven with moksha. That is, in Christianity it's usually thought that salvation of the individual can't be attained until after death. But in Hinduism it is prescribed as an ideal that one can attain moksha or salvation in this life, and thus become what the Hindus call a jivanmukti, that is, free in this life. And that ideal of jivanmukti, of attaining spiritual liberation in this life, feeds into the concept of sannyasa then. Because a sannyasin, or a female sannyasin, a sannyasini, these are people who have moved through the stage of vanaprastha and have entered into this ideal of sannyasa, or of saintliness. It depends, as I said, upon the result of vanaprastha, because one obviously can wander about in the forest for a very long time and not attain this kind of self-realization or self-knowledge or understanding of what is true, good, noble, right, just, all of the platonic ideals. One has to attain a certain wisdom, and the archetypal example here is that of Gautama Buddha. Lord Buddha wandered in the forest for seven years, and at the end of that seven years he managed to attain a degree, a large degree we might say, of enlightenment. And the Buddha and the Buddha's journey here is relevant. So let's recall it, because it seems to me it sets forth for us a kind of quintessential archetypal example of what the journey should be like. The Buddha's journey, remember, began at age 18, when he, a Hindu, within a palace, began to sense that something was wrong. That he had not seen anything outside the palace gates. His father, a prince, a king at that time, was so concerned about the Buddha's welfare, that is about the young Buddha, who then had not attained his realization, as we call Siddhartha, he was so concerned about Siddhartha's welfare that he protected him, to make sure that he was not hurt by that world of reality outside the palace gates. And so the Buddha, at that point at age 18, sensing that there was something wrong, decides he must leave. And all of the father's tricks and powers, marshaled to keep the Buddha within the palace, are defied, and the Buddha manages through magic more than anything else to get out of the palace. And he gets out, and he wanders around briefly outside before his father detects him, and he sees that there is something out here that he hadn't been told about. There is old age, there is disease, there is death. And the Buddha, in this moment of truth, realizes that he has been kept in a state of ignorance. And so he contrives to leave the palace forever. And at that critical age, I think, I often mention this to my students, that age 18 somehow is so important. It will be important for Plato, he studies with Socrates from ages 18 to 28. It's important for many other philosophers. For Marx, it was extremely important. This decade, 18 to 28, but especially these years right around 18, when one is searching for one's identity, for values that matter. Well, the Buddha at this age makes this critical decision to leave the palace, and the seven years of searching begin. And he, who was already a husband, a father at that point, leaves his family, and the long vanaprastha stage, beginning quite early, is necessary in order to fit in so much that the Buddha did manage to attain. And he goes, wanders around the forest for seven years, and then back, back to bring enlightenment to people, and that is the task of the sannyasin. So in this highest stage of development, the Buddha returns to society after having perceived the unity of all being. Thus enlightened by this highest knowledge, I've said here in the outline, the sannyasin moves throughout society, yet transcends its rules, its rules of caste and of class, transcends the temptations of wealth, of property, or of sex. The behavior of the saint in society is strictly non-violent, notice, he or she having learned the necessary connection between the highest truth, the identity of all being, that we're all part of one another, and of non-violence, of ahimsa. This connection between truth and non-violence, between, in Hindu terms, satya and ahimsa, this connection rests on the premise that if we inflict injury on another, we necessarily harm ourselves. Now let's look at that connection carefully because it is so important in terms of Gandhi's thought. Gandhi's idea of non-violence, we see at the very end of the series when we talk about Gandhi, is derived directly from this particular connection. That is, remember our premise that the highest truth that one can perceive is this realization that oneself is an all being, and all being is in oneself. And so therefore, if one attains that highest perception, one inflicts injury on another only at the cost of hurting oneself. And that identity of life, that unity of being, that sense that we are indeed all part of one another, that is the premise that underwrites this ideal of sannyasa, and that was Buddha's message to the world, that there is this sublime spiritual connectedness. And if E.M. Forster said it much later, Buddha said it first and foremost following Hinduism, and that is that the great truth of life is only connect. We connect with one another and as we achieve that connectedness, we then transcend the fear, the anxiety inspired by separateness. Satya and Ahimsa then, truth and non-violence, with truth being the unity of being, and non-violence being the axiom that necessarily flows from that unity. Now let's take and examine closely the fourth of our four concepts, that is the ideal relationship between the individual and society, between the self and the system. This, I've said in the outline, is based on theories of human nature and of the way that nurture or education should develop one's nature. Now in one column I've indicated here what we'll be returning to when we talk about Plato and Plato's Republic, and that is in the left-hand column of the outline under the fourth concept, I've indicated the theory of the tripartite self, and then in the right-hand column I've listed the tripartite system. And if we note this, because I think it influences Plato very much, he used to take the same kind of logic and tripartite systems for his Republic. If we note the theory of the tripartite self and how it correlates to the theory of the tripartite system, we get the evolution of the caste system in India, as well as the theory of human nature and of how to nurture it. Now the theory of the tripartite self goes like this, that each one of us has a personality composed of three parts, and the three parts are sattva, which is wisdom or goodness, rajas, which is courage or energy, and tamas, which is desire or appetite. Each one of us must have all of those three qualities, but each one of us will not have the three qualities in the same ranking order. That is, some of us will have more sattva than others, some of us will have more rajas, some of us will have more tapas, and the society is organized according to who has a predominance of what. With the brahmins being the premier caste or group, because they presumably have more wisdom and goodness, with the kshatriya, notice this is the political military caste, having more rajas, that is courage or energy, and the vaisya caste having more desire or appetite, so the vaisya caste is the commercial or agricultural caste. Now often when we hear the word, the very word caste, it puts us off so much, a censor awakened, and we, I think, react adversely to any suggestion of creating castes in a society. And certainly if we look at the present caste system in India, we are right to come to that conclusion. The origins of the caste system were not on the basis of heredity, they were on the basis of merit. And so to go back to our first concept, the purpose of the educational system is to ferret out, to understand the ordering in any personality, in terms of sattva, rajas and tamas, to discern in that particular individual, the teacher discerns in the individual what the individual is best qualified for, and then the individual achieves his or her best quality within that particular group. The origin then of the caste system is based upon merit, upon the essence of the personality. And note a couple of things about this. First, there is no sense of equality here. The society at best, even on the basis of merit, is organized according to a meritocracy, and not on any kind of democratic principle. That is, these three elements in the self are essential, indispensable. And the three elements in society are essential and indispensable, but they are not equally valuable. That is, the Brahmins are the most valuable in terms of giving the society a moral purpose as teachers of the society, and then the Kshatriyas, the political types, and then the commercial caste or the commercial groups. So there is in Hinduism nowhere any premise of equality in terms of the ordering of the society. That is, equality is a belief that comes in much later on, in Western thought in the 17th century, and it was really nowhere in either classical Hindu thought or classical Western thought. Plato was one of the strongest opponents of equality, and it was Plato who took this ordering and couched it in these same terms, as we'll see when we look at the Republic. The other point about this is, in terms of the ordering, the way in which the political caste is necessarily subservient to the Brahmin caste, the Kshatriya to the Brahmin, or the political leader, or the military leader for that matter, to the philosopher, to the teacher, to the priestly caste. We're using the terms philosopher and priest here synonymously, which they can be used in Hinduism, even though, of course, in the Western tradition they're not. Notice with that ordering, the implications of that and the importance of it. Plato will argue that the philosopher ruler is a political type who is the highest member of the society. And power, in this sense, can be administered wisely, wisely, Plato will argue, by a philosopher who assumes political responsibilities. The Hindus will have none of this. They argue quite the opposite, that politics is, as we said before, a contaminating force, and if one is truly on a quest for truth and has within one the sattva qualities, that is, the ability to pursue this truth, they will not engage in politics. They wouldn't want to meddle with politics under any circumstances because it is not likely to foster their own spiritual progress and it will contaminate their whole judgment. So what do we get in Hindu society? We get the idea that spiritual power can be wielded wisely by Brahmins, that political power will be wielded by the Kshatriyas if the Kshatriyas listen to the Brahmins and take the moral counsel for the Brahmins. But under no circumstances do we have individuals on top in a society who can wield power wisely because they're performing a political responsibility. The minute they assume a political duty, they will be contaminated by that force of politics. They'll be corrupted by it. What are we arguing here? We're arguing that there's a basic difference between Hindu thought and Greek thought, as we suggested earlier. And the key difference is about the nature of politics, the inevitable nature of politics. From the Greek point of view, as we were arguing before and emphasizing, we're political animals. From the Hindu point of view, those on top in any society will have nothing to do with politics precisely because their personal constitution, the makeup of their character is such that they are ordered, in a way, to direct themselves, those on top, to a spiritual purpose. And that spiritual purpose is to give society a vision. And the argument of Hinduism is, surely, as said in Proverbs, without vision, people perish. The responsibility of the Brahmin is to give that moral vision and directedness to a society. Why is it that the political figure cannot do it? Because of the constitution of his self. Because he's limited in that way. There's more rajas than there is sattva. Why should this be? Because individuals are different. They're born differently. They're innately different. They either have this capacity or not. But whether or not the capacity is realized depends upon the educational system. The educational system discerns the ordering of the self. The educational system then elicits from the self the particular quality, the gift, the special excellence that that individual has. And as the educational system does that, there is a lot of responsibility placed upon the teacher to come back to our original premise. The teacher has to know the student intimately in order to achieve that degree of understanding. And the student is directed towards his or her particular task in society accordingly. How do we reconcile the third concept with the fourth concept? I think the Hindus were never able to reconcile it entirely. That is, the third concept being that of self-development through stages of life, the journey, and ordering a society adequately. They have the two premises going on. That is, one of spiritual freedom, the other of social order. The one of spiritual liberation and the other of political responsibility. These two needs are within the society and it seems they are not entirely reconciled by the Hindus. There is a basic individualism in Hinduism insisting that we may leave society and say goodbye to it, which there is not in Western thought. There is in Western thought, as we'll see next time, the development of a political philosophy. And that political philosophy, beginning with the premise that we're political animals, political philosophy anticipated by Thucydides and by the great Greek dramatists, Sophocles we'll be talking about, is fully consolidated. That political vision is fully consolidated by Plato and then by Aristotle who insists that we can trust politics. That political power can be wielded wisely. But that is an ideal attained only by a few. And in the Republic, indeed, only by a very few. A philosophical elite that manages to attain this quality of sattva, of wisdom, with enough insight, enough understanding, to attain the just, the good society, the rightly ordered state.
