Lecture 8, Labeling, is Deviance of the Eye of the Beholder? The theories we're going to start exploring now are theories that are fundamentally different than what we've talked about up till now. Before I begin to speak about them, I should say that the next two lectures will be a seamless whole, a moving through a set of ideas. Unlike the theories we talked about in the first half of the course, these theories are not separate theories, created by separate theorists with some sort of boundary. Rather, I'm going to talk about an intellectual tradition that started in the 1960s and moved, actually started before that, but it really came to fore in the 1960s, and moved all the way into the present day until now, many, many deviance theorists use these theories as their main tools of analysis. These theories are more radical than the theories we've spoken about so far. They look at the world differently. They ask different questions. They systematically try to question the basic assumptions of the theories we have talked about so far. They suggest that deviance, as we think about it, does not exist. They suggest that there is no real basic difference between someone who is deviant and someone who isn't deviant. In fact, they suggest there is no basic behavior that is, in and of itself, deviant. They suggest the deviant doesn't really do anything that makes him or herself deviant. What these theories suggest instead is that we as a society create categories of deviance and apply these categories of deviance to people who are just out in the world behaving. As I said about some other theories, these theories don't deny the insights of the theories that came before. They try to incorporate them. But since they pose their question completely differently, they set up a different set of dilemmas around the issue of deviance. Instead of asking the question, what makes a deviant deviate? Why would a person do a thing like that? After all, when you hear about a terrible crime or some act of deviance, or even when you hear about someone who has a sexual fetish, the response most people say is, why would someone do that? How could someone do that? What is it about this person that makes them go out and kill? What is it about this person that makes them so attracted to, sexually attracted to small children? Labeling theory, the first part of the perspective we're going to talk about, says that's the wrong question. The question is not, why does a deviant deviate? But the question is, what makes a society regard a person's action as deviant? Why does a society need or want to censure this particular behavior? Why do they censure it differentially, that is, some people are condemned for it while other people seem to get away with it? And in what sense does power in society inform the way in which these definitions are created? In order to understand the labeling perspective and then soon the conflict and the constructionist perspective that we'll talk about next, we have to look at a basic set of sociological assumptions, a history of sociological theories. And these theories, and there are many of them, symbolic interactionism, phenomenology, ethno-methodology, there are all of these different ways of doing this, say, in order to understand society, what we really have to look at is how meaning is created and meaning is communicated in society. We are meaning animals. That is, when I go out and I behave in society, let's think about social disorganization. Social disorganization, as you remember, says, here you have a part of the city, it is socially disorganized, therefore the people in this part of the city behave a certain way. It never says, let me try to understand how the people in this part of the city try to make meaning of their social circumstance, try to interpret their poverty, try to understand the relationship between the classes, they never ask the question. That's why it is a structural theory. And it's deterministic. If you live here, you're going to behave this way, I don't really care very much what you think about it. That's just the way it is. The intellectual tradition we're coming from now says, in order to understand why people behave a certain way in social life, we must understand how they construct reality. This isn't an alien idea to us. Peter Berger, who wrote the book The Sacred Canopy that I talked about, wrote another book called The Social Construction of Reality. How is it that people, as they move about their social lives, construct images and pictures of the way social life is, and then filter social information through the pictures they're creating? This is very important for deviants. People can behave exactly the same way and have that behavior filtered differently. I talked about the example of the man on the street corner in a three-piece suit and a briefcase. And the police, he's been standing there for a long time, and the policeman comes up to him and says, you know, is everything all right, sir? And he says, yes, I'm waiting for a colleague. And the policeman filters that information. Three-piece suit, obviously employed, probably white, looks like he's got a nice job, got some social power, fine. Then he comes up to a homeless man standing in the same place, behaving the same way, and he says, what are you doing here? And the man says, I'm waiting for a buddy. Same behavior, same excuse, and the policeman says, move along, no loitering. The policeman has filtered the social information coming into him through some conceptual grid that he has about the nature of the social world and has acted in relation to that. The question we want to ask is, where did that grid come from in this particular policeman? And the answer is, it comes on a lot of different levels. It may come in part from his particular prejudice. Maybe he is prejudiced against minority races or against the lower class or something like that. It probably also comes from some kind of departmental policies in his particular police department. Some police departments are very, very clear about trying not to do that kind of thing or doing it only in certain parts of the city where they're not likely to be seen doing it by people who will probably have the inclination to report them. And so there's what we call an institutionalizational culture or an organizational culture of the police department. And then, of course, there's the broader question of how the society itself paints the relationship between the classes and the relationship between the races. A compelling theory says deviance can only be understood in terms of how a society reacts to behavior. No behavior, no behavior is deviant in and of itself. There is no such thing as deviance if you limit deviance to the act of an individual. Remember, we're sociologists. And sociologists suggest that to understand whether something is deviant, we have to ask how does society treat it. I've had students say to me, stuttering isn't deviant, right? And I say to them, the stutterer feels deviant. The society treats the stutterer as deviant. The stutterer says, my friends made fun of me. My teachers got frustrated with me because I couldn't get it out. I always felt embarrassed. Girls wouldn't go out with me. And so sociologically speaking, though you may not want stuttering to be deviant, in every sociological sense it's a deviant status. On the other hand, someone may be a sexual fetishist of some kind, and late at night when he's alone, he could be the vice president of IBM, doesn't matter, late at night he's home and he engages, indulges in his sexual fetish, whatever it is, nobody knows about it but him, and he, sociologically speaking, is not deviant. Why? Nobody treats him that way. Society has not reacted to him in a deviant fashion. If it gets out, then he might be deviant. But deviant in this sense has to have a reaction. In what sense is he deviant if nobody knows about it? In no meaningful social sense, except one sort of caveat, which is that he himself may label himself deviant. But labeling theory says the process of deviance starts when the process of labeling someone deviant starts. In that sense, there are three aspects of labeling that we need to look at. The first is how a particular behavior begins to be labeled deviant. I'm up here giving a lecture, nobody would say lecturing is deviant. It's not cast in social terms as a deviant behavior. However, sodomy has a long history of deviant behavior, of deviant labels. It's been illegal, as a matter of fact, the punishment for sodomy has been death in this very country in colonial times and in Puritan times. The punishment for sodomy was death. So there's a question, how does that behavior, then we take it up to the second level, how does a particular individual get labeled deviant? For example, there is the famous case of Bowers versus Hardwick, which I'm going to talk about a little more in the last lecture, in which it was the big test case in the Supreme Court in modern times about whether a state had a right to outlaw sodomy. Isn't that infringing on someone's personal right to sexual privacy? And the Supreme Court decided that Georgia had a right to outlaw sodomy. One of the arguments that was made in trying to get the court to overturn it was it's not fairly applied. It has only been applied to homosexual sodomy, even though the statute says it's equally illegal for heterosexual sodomy and homosexual sodomy, only homosexuals are ever arrested for it. And it was a persuasive argument, but it didn't wash. So the question is, why are deviant labels selectively applied? And then there's the third question, the biggest question, how does a group get labeled? Why is it that homosexuals are labeled deviant as a group in society? So we have three levels of questions in labeling, how behavior gets labeled, how selective individuals get labeled, and how a group as a whole gets labeled. When we look at the process of labeling, we have to look at it as a dynamic social interaction. Instead of taking for granted that certain behaviors are deviant, certain behaviors aren't, and then saying, okay, why do people engage in this behavior? We have to say, what is the process by which, in a dynamic, ongoing form, behaviors and people get labeled and delabeled, behaviors move in and out of social currency, it's okay to do this, it's not okay to do this. Certain people move in and out of deviant labels, the person is, OJ is arrested, and right now everyone is condemning him as a deviant, but if he's acquitted, maybe he'll manage to move back out of the deviant label, and people will forget about this, and people will say, well, he was proved innocent, and he can lose that stigma that's been attached to him. It's a dynamic process. As a matter of fact, one of the founders of this perspective, named Kitsusi, wrote, deviance may be conceived as a process by which members of a group, community, or society, one, interpret some behavior as deviant, two, define persons who so behave as a certain kind of deviant, and three, accord them treatments appropriate to such deviance. That's the process by which we create deviance in society. If there is a social construction of reality, if social life is really about making interpretations and forming meaning and reforming meaning, instead of being some static set of definitions about what society is, remember Durkheim's boundaries? Remember how they shimmer? Labeling takes that even to a greater point, saying it's not just an argument about where those boundaries are, those boundaries are always fluid, they're always changing, they're always being redefined. We're arguing all the time in the media, and we're arguing in the courts, and we're arguing in the forum of social public opinion about what is an acceptable set of behaviors, who they should be applied to, and who they shouldn't be applied to. What is universal about deviance, what is across societies about deviance, is not the content of a deviant act. In other words, someone might say, wait a second, wait a second, I get what you're getting at, but look, you're trying to argue here that it isn't, there's no fundamentally deviant behavior, what about murder? Isn't murder illegal in all societies? Yes, almost every society has a rule against murder, but the term murder is interpreted differently in almost every society. After all, think about the term murder for a second, it is a very different word than the word killing. Very different. Many, many, many types of killing are not murder. Many types of one person killing another person are not murder. Think of a person comes up to me and I stab them, and then later they, police say to me, why did you stab them? I said, I thought he was about to kill me. Now the question of whether I really thought that is all the difference between whether that was killing or murder. Nothing is as vague and subjective as whether I really thought he was going to kill me. And now we have a trial and I have to convince the jury that I really thought he was going to kill me. And there lies the process of whether or not to label me deviant, is how well I can convince another group, a representative of the society, about whether or not I really thought he was going to kill me. If they buy it, I'm a free man, no different than anyone else. If they don't buy it, I am a deviant extraordinaire. I am a murderer, one of the worst kinds of deviants I can be. That's a very tenuous fulcrum we got going there, on which side is going to be heavier, which way I'm going to land. Howard Becker is considered really the greatest articulator of the labeling perspective. In his book, Outsiders, and then in subsequent books in the early 60s, he really tried to turn around the whole way in which deviants had been thought about before that. Howard Becker said, this is the basic definition of deviance, and I'm going to read you a quote from his book. Deviance is not a quality of the act the person commits, but rather a consequence of the application by others of rules and sanctions to the offender. And here in his next sentence is the most quoted sentence in the labeling perspective. The deviant is one to whom that label has been successfully applied. Deviant behavior is behavior that people so label. What does that mean? It means, what is a murderer? Someone who society considers a murderer. That's it. That's the definition. No more, no less. Think about it for a second. If it's true, as I said at the beginning of this lecture, that to the sociologist, what is important is not the act of the person, but the reaction of society. The question isn't whether stuttering is or isn't deviant. The question is whether the stutterer is treated as deviant, feels deviant. Then we have to ask the question, here we have a person. They're accused of murder. They didn't do it. They never did the act. They are convicted. Is that person deviant? This is not a trivial question. This is a fundamental question. How do the theories we talked about in the first half of this course, in the first five, six lectures, how can they answer that question? Learning theory, social disorganization theory. If you ask someone like that, look, this person has been convicted of murder. They didn't do it. Do they feel deviant? They can't even cope with that question. It doesn't fit into their theoretical structure. Labeling says yes. Why? And you say, but they didn't do it. Irrelevant. They are deviant in the sense that society has now given them a deviant label. It's treating them like a deviant. Ask them if they feel deviant. They'll say to you, I didn't do it, but I'm being treated like a murderer. In other words, society has created the role of murderer for that person, whether they did it or not. Now let's say some new evidence comes out and it's proven that they didn't do it. Society says, oh, it's a terrible thing that we did. You're no longer a murderer. Come back. We'll try to de-label you as much as we can. But sociologically speaking, when you've got that label on you, it's irrelevant whether you did it or not. In terms of social dynamics, you're a deviant. You're treated like one. You're ostracized. You're incarcerated. You're not allowed to see your kids. All those things that we do to try to sanction deviance has been applied to you. The truth of the matter is that in many, many, many of the people we treat as deviant, we don't absolutely know whether they did it or not. We may never know whether OJ actually did it or not. He may be convicted and still insist on his innocence. We may never know. But if he's convicted, he is a deviant to our society. Whether he actually did it or not, we've made our decision. Howard Becker created a typology, a way to think about this. There are two possible labels you can have from society. A conformer or a deviant. And there are two possibilities. You did it or you didn't do it. Okay? So let's look at that four-way table for a second. It's not in your outline, but it's a very simple thing to think about. You did nothing. Society doesn't think you did anything. That's most of us. You're a conformer. Now we'll take the opposite extreme. You did it. Society thinks you did it. Becker calls that pure deviance. But there are two other categories here that labeling elucidates in a way that none of the other theories even consider. The first, you didn't do it. Society thinks you did it. You're falsely accused. You are a false deviant in a sense, but it doesn't matter because socially speaking you're no different than a real deviant. The only place that that difference exists is in your own mind. And now let's take the fourth category. You did it. Society doesn't think you did it. That's what we call secret deviance. That's that vice president of IBM that goes home at night and indulges in his sexual fetish. He's a secret deviant. He knows the social consequences of revealing his behavior and so he doesn't reveal it. In simple terms, labeling is a process whereby society creates deviance and applies it. I'll give you another example of what labeling can elucidate for us. There's a big debate in society now about smoking cigarettes. How far should we go? But let's say, by some miracle in the next election, swept into office a whole series of virulently anti-smoking legislators. And they managed to push through Congress, though this would never happen, they managed to push through Congress a strong anti-smoking legislation. That is, tobacco is now going to be considered in the same category as marijuana and it will be illegal to smoke tobacco. Now here I am. I'm sitting in my house. I'm 60 years old. I have been smoking cigarettes for 45 years. I am not deviant. I'm just doing the same thing I've always been doing, smoking my cigarette. The legislation goes into, starts being enforced at 12 o'clock midnight. At 11.55 I light up a cigarette. I finish it at 11.59, I am not a deviant. 12.01 I light up another one, I'm a criminal. And now these theories in the first half of this course want to say, what is it about this person that makes them a deviant? And the answer is nothing. Society changed around them. They're doing what they always did. It is society and society's definitions that have created deviance in this situation. The individual is doing what they always did. Individuals behave. Society interprets. And that's true whether we're talking about smoking cigarettes or whether we're talking about murdering people. Let's give one more example. The same Howard Becker that talks about these things, talks about the Marijuana Stamp Act, Federal Marijuana Stamp Act of 1937. An interesting thing happened there. You had had for many years at about that time, for about 20 years, you had had the movement in the United States to make opium illegal. As many people know, in the 19th century you could buy drugs right over the counter, very, very potent drugs.

Some people had estimated that in the late 19th century, one-third of all women in New England were addicted to laudanum. Because they could just go, you could go to the corner drugstore and buy extremely potent drugs without a prescription and take as much of them as you wanted to. Coca-Cola is called Coca-Cola because originally it had cocaine extract in it. Good way to sell a product is to get people addicted to it. Take cigarettes. So, opium becomes illegal in the early 20th century and we create the Federal Bureau of Narcotics to oversee this new set of illegal substances. Federal Bureau of Narcotics begins to realize that there is power in having control over a banned substance. So they begin to push for a movement to make marijuana illegal. So what do they do? First, they create propaganda movies, like Reefer Madness, a movie that was created in the early 1930s that shows a group of very nice, well-adjusted high school students at a party who try a little marijuana and turn into raving lunatics. But they do something even more subtle than that. Before this starts, you see an article in the newspaper. It says Howard Jones was arrested yesterday for the murder of his girlfriend. Howard Jones is a 33-year-old white male and has pled not guilty. And then they would go on and give you the facts. After the Federal Bureau of Narcotics gets involved, the story reads a little differently. Howard Jones has just been arrested for the murder of his girlfriend. Howard Jones is a 30-whatever-year-old white male who has pled not guilty. An ounce of marijuana was found in his apartment. And then they go on and give the rest of the story. Well, milk was found in his apartment. Shoes were found in his apartment. Lots of things were found in his apartment. Why is marijuana pulled out? Because they are creating a mental link between the act and this particular substance that was found and no other substances that were found. The Federal Bureau of Narcotics wants you to begin to associate the marijuana that was found in his apartment with the heinous act he had committed because they want you to support the idea of making marijuana illegal. And in 1937, despite the fact that marijuana is not an opiate, it doesn't fit chemically or any other way under the category of opiates that have been made illegal, marijuana becomes illegal. Now, why is this important? This is important because there's another aspect to labeling that we haven't started to talk about yet. And that is the fact that if society, if it is society's definitions of deviance that are important, then we still have to start asking the question, who creates these definitions of deviance? Howard Becker says, I'm going to call these people moral entrepreneurs. Moral entrepreneurs. A moral entrepreneur is someone who goes out into society and says, I am going to try to convince you that a particular moral point of view is a point of view that the society should adopt about an issue. Take abortion. We've got moral entrepreneurs on both sides of the abortion issue. We've got pro-life who is saying, here's my moral position, the fetus is a human being and abortion is murder. We've got pro-choice who says, the moral obligation here is to allow a woman a right to her own body. And they're fighting it out in the form of public opinion. Laws don't happen magically. Laws are created by people because other people fight for those laws. Definitions of deviance don't happen magically. Definitions of deviance happen because individuals go out and fight for those definitions. Moral entrepreneurs try to change those shimmering boundaries of society, push them a little, mold them a little, so that new visions of deviance can be created. In order to try to show how robust a labeling perspective can be, I want to take a few minutes out here and talk about how the labeling perspective is really the first perspective that we have covered so far that can understand that third category of deviance that none of the others could understand. Remember I said there are three categories of deviance. Voluntary criminal deviance, someone who goes out and does a crime. Voluntary non-criminal deviance, someone who has a sexual fetish that's not against the law. And involuntary deviance, a mentally ill, the stutterer. All of these people who are treated as deviant by society but they're not doing something voluntarily. None of our other theories could understand involuntary deviance, but labeling theory can understand it perfectly. And in order to explore that, let's look at medicine for a minute, and particularly mental illness. There's a fellow named Thomas Szasz uh... who wrote a book called The Myth of Mental Illness. He's a psychiatrist. Psychiatrist who argues that psychiatry is an illegitimate discipline. He is not beloved by the psychiatric profession. And Szasz says the following, what's an illness? An illness is characterized by some sort of physiological pathological process. That is, something abnormal happens in the physiology of the body. You take a test, you do a biopsy, you find a lesion, something, some physiological manifestation of pathology is what an illness is. Maybe the white blood cells are too high, the white blood cells are too low. We find a tumor. Whatever it is. What, however, characterizes mental illness? Where's the lesion? Where's the pathology? Let's take something like uh... a phobia. A person cannot even go out of their house because they're so scared of open places. Agoraphobia. Now, I'm the physician, I walk in and I say Thomas Szasz is here and he says, you find me the lesion. You find me the white blood cell count. You find me the malfunctioning kidney. You find me the physiological manifestation of illness here. And we can't, of course. And so Szasz says, this is not illness. Rather, this is a problem in living. And to treat it as illness is to create a social set of deviance definitions about this. It doesn't fit. But, this goes even further. What is mental illness really from this perspective? Let's think about it for a minute. Throughout history, there have been categories that human beings have created in which to put behaviors that they don't understand. Witchcraft is an example. Someone begins to act crazily or in a way that society can't really understand, they say, must be possessed. Must be cursed. That is what we might call a residual category. If you can't find a category to explain this behavior, you call it witchcraft. Deities, witches, when microorganisms, the idea of germs first created, they were used to explain everything. Thomas Sheff, a labeling theorist of mental illness said, mental illness is what I'm going to call residual deviance. A person begins behaving in a way that society doesn't accept. Someone starts acting in a bizarre fashion. So we say to ourselves, maybe they're drunk. Find out, no, they didn't drink anything. Maybe they struck their head. Nope, didn't strike their head. Maybe it's a fraternity hazing ritual and they said, you have to go out in front of a bunch of people and dance crazily and if you could do it, you can... No, not a fraternity. Once we run out of reasons, we say the person is mentally ill. Mental illness is a residual category of deviance. It is a category into which we throw all the deviance for which we cannot find another explanation. And in that sense, mental illness is not defined by what it is. It's defined by what it is not. It is not drunkenness. It is not a hazing ritual. It is there for mental illness. Or let's put it another way. I talked a little bit early on about role theory, the idea that each of us goes through life playing certain roles. Irving Goffman, great sociologist at the University of Pennsylvania, looked at the world dramaturgically. That is, he analyzed social life almost as if it was a play with people playing roles. I am up here playing the role of professor. I have on my professorial voice. I'm doing my professorial gestures. These kinds of gestures and this kind of voice would be inappropriate when I'm talking to my child. All of us pretty fluidly move through our roles. We're the daughter. We're the son. We're the father. We're the sister. We're the friend. We're the baseball player. We're the diner. Whatever we do, we know the correct ways to do it and as we move through our social life, we're pretty good at understanding what our role is in a particular context. If we're not so good at it, we call these people socially inept. We don't like them too much. This person doesn't understand how to act at a cocktail party. If we're very, very good at it, we might be an actor. We might be a politician. And I don't say that as a joke. A politician must be very good at going from one social role to another, from one social context to another, and playing their role well. But what if we're really bad at it? What if we really can't seem to master the art of facile role-playing? You know what we call those people? Mentally ill. So here's a role theory interpretation of mental illness. What do all these ideas about mental illness have in common? They say the following. It's not really what the individual does that's an issue here, or how they behave. It is how society interprets them. After all, in some societies, that which we call mental illness now was considered to be inspiration from God. If you look in the Bible in Samuel, you read about the ecstatic prophets who went around, fell on the ground, and prophesied, and saw visions. We would probably call that now a grandma epileptic seizure. But that's because we're putting a pejorative medical interpretation on what they interpreted as a gift from God. The behavior's the same. Our interpretation is different. What we do in our society today, very often, is we medicalize deviance. We've changed the label of deviance. Let's take another example of that that's really fascinating. In the 1930s or 40s, the policeman pick you up and you have had a lot to drink. You are drunken disorderly and you're put in the drunk tank. Now you are an alcoholic. We have taken what was a legal label. We've redefined it as a medical label. We do that all the time. There are a whole series of new addictive disorders. Gambling addiction, eating addiction, sexual addiction, which used to have a much less flattering name a few years ago, like nymphomania. We have taken a whole series of behaviors and relabeled them as medical. We've moved them from the jurisdiction of the legal profession into the jurisdiction of the medical profession. What labeling says is that the process of understanding deviance has to be the process of understanding how a particular society at a particular point in time understand its deviance, creates ideas about what behaviors are going to be so labeled. But there's another component to it too. It's not just about creating definitions of deviance. It's about selectively applying them. The example I gave was the policeman at the street corner with the homeless person versus the executive. But it's much more than that. Because selectively applying labels has to do with social power. It has to do with social relationships. Let's give one more example of mental illness. Here we have someone. They begin to act in a way that their family thinks is somehow strange, somehow bizarre. Family begins to talk amongst itself. You notice Bill lately? Bill has been acting a little strange. We have begun to initiate what Irving Goffman calls the moral career of the mental patient. This person is now begun a process whereby others with power over this person are going to begin to force this person to accept a set of labels and act like it. What do I mean by that? I turn to my friend. I turn to my wife. I turn to my parents. I say, you know, Bill is acting strange. I'm beginning to get worried about it. Well, I haven't noticed anything. Watch him. So now I have planted my label in someone else's mind. They come back to me and they say, you're right, you know, Bill is acting strange. What do you think we should do about it? I'm not sure. Let's talk to him about it. Bill, you know, are you okay? Oh, yeah, I'm fine. Your time? No. Stress? No. Come back. You know, Bill says nothing's wrong. Something's definitely wrong. You know, I know Dr. Smith, who's a psychiatrist. I'm just going to give him a call. One of the things that mental patients, people who are defined as, mentally I'll always say, is they feel the sense of people conspiring against them. You know why? And they say, oh, that's part of their mental illness. It's not part of their mental illness. People are conspiring against them. People are talking about them behind their back. People are calling the psychiatrist on the sly. It's part of the moral career of the mental patient. It's part of this process we put them through. What is one of the first things we want anyone, whether they're an alcoholic, whether we think they're an alcoholic, whether we think they're a mental patient, what is the first thing we want them to do? What is the first step to cure, we always say? Admitting you have a problem. How do you get someone to admit they have a problem? You convince them that they have a problem. You become a moral entrepreneur. And you say, look, Bill, you're never going to get better until you admit you have a problem. But I, Bill, don't think I have a problem. All right, I'm going to withdraw affection, I'm going to withdraw support, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to talk to you. I start to threaten Bill that unless he accepts my label of his behavior, I will begin to withdraw from him and other people will begin to withdraw from him, that which he needs to live and sustain himself. I'm using a coercive method of labeling to get someone to admit to a label that they may not agree with. And this is the means by which, Irving Goffman says, we push someone through a moral career, career in the sense is used in the sociological meaning, not necessarily that from which you gain your livelihood, but a set of steps, life steps, that you go through. We all have statuses. When I talk about role theory, there's a part of role theory called statuses. And we all inhabit many statuses, of many different kinds. I am a professor at a university, that's one of my statuses. I am a husband. I am a white male. I'm a baby boomer. I have all of these statuses. But there are some select statuses that sociologists call your master statuses. And these are statuses that are more than just parts of what identify you, but they fundamentally make up the way people react to you. For example, in our society, race is a master status. Being black or being white in this society has a lot to do with how you feel about the way you live in this society, how people react to you. Gender is a master status. In other societies, for example, race may not be a master status. That society may not differentiate much about race. In our society, we do. Master status becomes a fundamental part of your identity. Mental illness becomes a master status. If you are considered to be mentally ill, people consider you mentally ill, they interpret your entire life, your behavior, their way of reacting to you, and looking at you through that status. It's a very dangerous thing to give someone a master status of mental illness. To push them through this moral career. That's the power of the labeling theory. The labeling theory can understand subtleties about the dynamics of deviance that none of the theories we've talked about before can really understand. However, there are also some problems with labeling theory. Though it's very good in focusing on society's reaction to the deviant, though it's very good in focusing on the dynamics of deviant formation, and even though I said that murder is interpreted differently in different societies, still, it probably is better at explaining those processes about which there's social disagreement than those about which there's a lot of social agreement. Talking about a mass murderer, talking about a serial killer, who would be deviant in almost every culture on earth, and saying this is all about labeling probably isn't that effective. On the other hand, talking about the vast majority of deviants, why beating your wife is a crime in the United States, and is a sign of healthy male machismo in some other cultures, why America has on the books thousands of crimes of a economic nature and a very small number of crimes of a political nature, while the former Soviet Union had thousands of political crimes and a much smaller set of economic crimes, says less about the fundamental nature of the deviant who performs than it says about the values of the society who wants to interpret that. A second problem with labeling theory. It is suggested from the beginning, labeling theory has, that deviance is a process whereby a powerless person is labeled by the powerful, and then enters this career of deviance. Well, Rosa Parks got on a bus in Montgomery, Alabama, and sat in the front of the bus, and defied the laws of Montgomery, Alabama, and the police came, and she said, arrest me. Her act of acquiring a deviant label, of performing a criminal act, was a powerful act. This wasn't about a bunch of powerful people labeling a powerless person, this was about a powerful person saying, label me, and I'm going to challenge your labels, I'm going to change society, because being labeled can be a powerful act. So it isn't always the powerful person labeling the powerless person. Another problem. A lot of people try to refute labeling theory by showing, as I said, that some crimes are considered universal crimes. And actually, there are a certain number of crimes that are pretty much agreed upon across societies that they are criminal behavior. Murder, kidnapping, certain kinds of rape, certain kinds of arson, for example, burning down someone else's living quarters, is universally considered to be an act of deviance. So there must be some fundamental acts that make living together in ordered society impossible, and yes, we may put layers of labeling on that, but labeling itself isn't going to be what really explains those things the best. And a final problem with labeling, and this is probably the problem that, in one sense, kills the labeling perspective when used alone. But as we'll see in the next lecture, when you take labeling theory and you combine it with a conflict perspective, it solves this and many of these other problems and you get a very robust theory. And that's this problem. If you were to take a pure labeling perspective, why have rehabilitation? If it's not my act, that's the issue in deviance, but it is your reaction as society, then how do I need to be rehabilitated? Why do I need it? What should rehabilitation do? It's not my problem, it's society's problem that it defined my act that way. Remember, I ended the last lecture by saying there's a way we could get rid of all crime. Make everything legal. Then there's no need for prisons, there's no need for rehabilitation. Remove society's process of labeling and you end all crime, of course. That's not acceptable. That's not fruitful. So labeling by itself can't help us that much. It gives us valuable insights, but it can't be the final word. But perhaps if we combine it with some other new insights in this general perspective, we might come out with something that can help us a lot more. Thank you.
