The 10th lecture in this series is devoted to the theory of Karl Marx, philosopher of communism and prophet of the revolutionary spirit of Jean-Jacques Rousseau. And I'll be treating Marx very much in the tradition of Rousseau because he certainly was influenced by him a good deal. And we speak of Marx's commitment to equality above all. He is trying to capture the Rousseauian optimism and revolutionary spirit of that 18th century philosopher. Marx was born in 1818 in Germany. He was educated at the universities of Bonn and Berlin where he eventually received his PhD in philosophy. His family was relatively affluent. His father was a lawyer and so keen on the successful practice of his law that he converted. His father converted a year before Karl was born from Judaism to Lutheranism because he thought that that conversion might help his law practice in this small town in Germany where he was. So Marx himself, following his father's example, seemed destined for a career in law or at least in academics with a PhD in philosophy. But he became involved in leftist revolutionary causes which was not a popular thing to be involved in at that time. And so he was soon exiled by the government from Germany to Paris where he wound up in 1843. And then in 1848, after having made himself unwelcome in Paris and a couple of other cities on the continent, he was finally exiled to London, the place where he could be. His father's example seemed destined for a career in law or at least in academics with a PhD in philosophy. But he became involved in leftist revolutionary causes which was not a popular thing to be involved in at that time. And so he was soon exiled by the government from Germany to Paris where he wound up in 1843. And then in 1848, after having made himself unwelcome in Paris and a couple of other cities on the continent, he was finally exiled to London, the place where he could be safe to write his treatises. And he finally settled there where he lived and worked until his death in 1883 and he is buried in London. Marx and his family suffered terribly, horribly from poverty and sickness during his first few years in London. We've talked about Rousseau's relative economic deprivation but Marx with his entire family, it seems to me, sets a tragic example of suffering. Many political theorists, of course, denounce poverty but Marx is one of the very few who actually lived in a state of horrendous poverty and hated it, denounced it because he had suffered himself and his loved ones so much from it. To get an idea of the circumstances of Marx's life in London, the next time you're there, you might visit Marx's home in London, that is the tiny rooms where he, his wife Jenny, and their four children settled in 1850 and lived for six years. Now these two rooms, only two rooms, are located and they're open to the public in Soho in London at 28 Dean Street, three flights above what is now the Quo Vadis restaurant. It's an odd arrangement. The rooms are not a national or a public memorial of any kind. They're owned by the Quo Vadis restaurant which we found a bit pricey but the restaurant encourages you first to have a meal there and then they show you to the rooms three flights up in this garret that Marx and his family were. The rooms then still exist there as they did then and they convey to some extent the reality of how little space this family had and with some imagination one can, I think, sense the toll taken on them by disease and cold as what Marx and his wife saw three of their children die in London. I think that the suffering of this family is conveyed most eloquently by Marx's spouse Jenny. Jenny, whose maiden name was von Westphalen, came from a Gentile family, a well-to-do family, and both sides, Marx's family and Jenny's family vehemently opposed their relationship but they married anyway and Jenny stuck with him bravely, well-educated and eloquent in her diary. She wrote this about their life on Dean Street. In the spring of 1852, Karl wrote his Eighteenth Bromere, one of his great works, and it was published in New York. He wrote the book in our small Dean Street apartment amidst all of the noise of the children, the turmoil of the household and above all the pain of the environment. In March I finished copying out the manuscript. That was one of Jenny's jobs as the spouse of Dostoevsky, also copy out most of his manuscripts. She finished copying out the Eighteenth Bromere and it was sent off but it didn't appear in print until much later and when it did it brought in next to nothing. At Easter 1852, our poor little Francisca, one year old, fell ill with severe bronchitis. For two days the poor child wrestled with death. She suffered much until she left us. Her little lifeless body rested in the small back room. We all wandered out into the front room after she died and when night fell we made our beds in the floor and the three living children lay with us and we wept for this little angel who lay cold and lifeless nearby. The death of our beloved child took place at the time of our bitterest poverty. Even our German friends couldn't help us. And so with anguish in my heart I ran to a French émigré who lived near us and used to visit us. I begged him for help in our terrible need and he, good man that he was, at once gave me two pounds with the friendliest sympathy and with the money then I was able to buy this small coffin. And there my poor child now slumbers peacefully. She had no cradle when she came into the world and for a long time she was refused a last resting place. How we suffered when the coffin was carried away to the graveyard. Obviously not many women have a chance to express their feelings throughout history of what it meant to live with these great philosophers. But Marx's family at least has that memento to express his life in London. And as you try to track down some of Marx's experience in London don't forget to visit after Dean Street the nearby British Museum, the reading room. You better go soon because it may not be there all that much longer with the conversion of the British Museum and the new magnificent library created nearby. I'm not sure myself exactly what is going to happen to the reading room but it was there in 1960 when my spouse and I first went to the British Museum and I then was actually able to sit in Marx's chair because it was there before those chairs were all sold to the Soviet Embassy later on. It was then to make sure that they got Marx's chair, they bought them all and it was there that Marx wrote then Das Kapital. He said at one point mainly to get away from the cold. The British Museum reading room was much warmer than those apartments in Dean Street. After that, after you've had a taste of where he worked and wrote his great works then get on the underground, that is the subway to Highgate. Be sure to get on the northern line and walk ten minutes after getting off that underground stop at Highgate, many of you are nodding perhaps you've done this, to the Highgate Cemetery. The Highgate Cemetery you'll find, if you haven't found already, is divided into two parts, the old cemetery and the new cemetery. Marx is buried in the new Highgate Cemetery. The British with their sense of history. His tomb is famous. It's the biggest attraction in the cemetery by far. One goes in, one has to pay an admission fare to go in. And if you ask the porter, the way to Marx's tomb knows instantly, expects that you'll ask that because even though George Eliot and Herbert Spencer are also buried in the new Highgate Cemetery and not far from Marx's, it's Marx who commands all the attention. I think this is partly because Marx's grave is marked by a huge granite head of his likeness. And we have films that you may have seen showing this. The British film High Hopes captures the tomb in a brief sequence, but the best one is a documentary that the Swedes made called 24 Hours at Marx's Grave. And the whole thing over an hour long is dedicated to interviewing people who came to this tomb to see it from all over the world. And it is a magnificent thought that Marx, after having suffered so much in poverty, not having been able to make enough from his publications to begin to support his family, nevertheless, is now still commanding this attention. People come from all over the world to see this tomb. And at the base of the monument are carved words from one of his writings, his Theses on Feuerbach. The words that are carved around the base are these. And I think they say a lot. They've captured the right lines here on the tomb. Philosophers have only interpreted the world. The point, however, is to change it, to change the world. This was Marx's mission. He wanted a revolution even more than Rousseau wanted it. And although he's had much more influence than most philosophers, it seems as though this mission has failed. That is, his message is today, despite all those visitors, those curious tourists coming to the tomb, his message is often discredited. Since the fall of the wall, since 1989, began the domino effect and brought down all of those dictatorships. Dictatorships that were called, I think Marx would say wrongly, communist. Is it true that his theory then is invalid? Has it been disproved since the collapse of communism? That's one of the questions that I want to ask. But first we need to examine the main components of his philosophy in order to assess its worth. Marx begins, like Plato, with a theory of the self, and a self that has three distinct components. And here he's influenced in part by Rousseau. The natural self, the alienated self, and the species self. And like Rousseau, Marx sees the self in the progress of a three-stage evolution. First there is the natural self in natural society, and this self embodies or represents or personifies our primary animal needs. And Marx says that these basic animal needs are, first of all, subsistence needs, that is, for food, for clothing, for shelter. Then he says our natural self has the innate need for sex. And finally for work, that is, we have a natural innate need to be engaged in some kind of productive activity. Now these needs are natural in the sense that we need them to survive as a species. They are instinctive, but they're not informed by reason to any degree. They're innate, they're spontaneous, rather than being planned and self-conscious. But they do demand and expect fulfillment. And so in the natural state of mind in society, these needs and natural man is immature. But these needs provide the basis for maturation. And they are, as Rousseau's instincts, remember, of self-preservation and compassion, they are deeply rooted in us. So we've got the picture to begin with. Marx, theorizing about the evolution of humanity, sees then natural man in natural society to be defined in terms of these natural needs. And the natural needs beginning with subsistence needs of food, clothing, and shelter, and then on to sex. And as we'll see, most importantly, this is Marx's key contribution, and that is the belief that we have a need for work to be engaged in some kind of productive activity. Now second, there is the alienated self in alienated society. And here's our old friend, the corrupt society that goes back to Plato, remember, and then Rousseau resurrects it forcefully when he talks about the corrupt society that we've just discussed, the modern society. Well, Marx, taking this same line from Rousseau, sees the present society as being a profoundly corrupt society. And Marx contributes a concept that Rousseau did not, and that's the concept of alienation. It is the alienated self in alienated society that he wants to discuss. This is our present condition in our contemporary Western society, created by, above all, the economic mode of production in which we find ourselves. It's certainly directly comparable to Rousseau's philosophy, that is the corrupt society of Marx comparable to Rousseau's corrupt society, which has a number of distinctions, not just the concept of alienation that I mentioned, but the emphasis now on economics, not just the institution of private property, but the way in which the economic mode of production, specifically, of course, with Marx, the capitalist mode of production, creates this alienation. From Marx's point of view, it's this that's all important. Marx goes then much further than Rousseau in terms of developing his philosophy of the roots of the corruption in our society, that is, the roots lying in the system of capitalism that has alienated us from our basic needs. It's because of this systemic corruption, identified specifically in contemporary terms as capitalism. Because of capitalism, we are unfulfilled. Because of capitalism, we are divided against others and divided from ourselves. That is, the kind of alienation that Marx suggests is an alienation of each from all, but also the alienation exists within us. We are alienated from our essence, from our best self, from, as we'll see, our species being. All of this, then, this corruption, is presided over by inequality. Inequality, then, that is enforced by capitalism and distorts our existence. Some of us suffer in this state of inequality from being underfulfilled in terms of our subsistence needs. Others are overfulfilled. But Marx argues that both classes, the bourgeois class and the proletariat class, the class with the haves and the class of the have-nots, both classes, he says, are alienated, alienated from their essence, alienated from the discovery, from the fulfillment of their species being, from their humanity. Now, this goes, as you can see, beyond Rousseau. Because of the system of capitalism, there has occurred a basic perversion of values, and this perversion of values infects us all. And Marx, as the prophet that he is, invades against what he calls the increasing, with the increasing value of the world of things, proceeds, this proceeds in direct proportion, the devaluation of the world of men. The only wheels which capitalism sets in motion are avarice, and the war amongst the avaricious, that war being called competition. Private property, here he is, of course, taking his lines from Rousseau, Rousseau, private property has made us so stupid and one-sided that an object is ours only when we have it, when it exists for us as capital, or when it is directly possessed. We cannot conceive, then, of enjoying an object unless we have that ownership of it, unless we can call it our private property. We delude ourselves into thinking that the more money we have, the richer will be our existence, the more security we will get, when in fact money only increases our wants, it only distances ourselves from our basic needs. And so it estranges us from those whose basic needs are unfulfilled. Now, here he is so much like Rousseau in terms of arguing that money corrupts, it distances us from others. We cannot possibly, Marx says, communicate with those who have less money because we are so concerned to protect our own. Marx wrote with a very deep sense of irony and sarcasm about the power of money in capitalist modern society, and he scorned the idolatry of money in this system. He says, in bourgeois society, my own power must be as great as the power of money. The properties of money are my properties and faculties. What I am and can do is not at all determined by my individuality, but only by my money. I am ugly, but I can buy the most beautiful woman for myself, and therefore I am no longer ugly. For the effect of ugliness is magically annulled by money. I am a detestable, dishonorable, unscrupulous and stupid man until I get money, and then no longer because money is honored and so therefore must also be its possessor. In the capitalist system, it is money that is the highest good, and so its possessor must always be good. I am presumed scrupulous and honest. Therefore, even though I am unscrupulous, I am stupid. Since money is the real mind of all things, how can its possessor be stupid and unscrupulous? Marx, when he's talking about money, it seems to me, invokes the very best of his rhetoric, and that rhetoric applies to the way in which he condemns in bourgeois society all things being enmeshed in what he calls the cash nexus. The cash nexus, a term that he uses in his Communist Manifesto, is that web that controls all of our values, that dominates people with and without cash, because in capitalism money assumes necessarily a life of its own. This is conveyed in a passage from Marx's best-known work, the Communist Manifesto, where he says that the historical development of capitalism and the corresponding rise of the bourgeoisie has pitilessly torn asunder the motley feudal ties that bound man to his natural superiors, and has left remaining no other nexus between man and man than naked self-interest, than callous cash payment. It has drowned everything in the icy water of egotistical calculation with its naked, shameless, direct, brutal exploitation. Now, we think about this. Marx is writing, at age 30, this work, the Communist Manifesto, a manifesto that, according to the British historian A.J.P. Taylor in his introduction to the Penguin edition of the Communist Manifesto, he says that the manifesto had, for some time, almost taken the place of the Bible among millions, hundreds of millions of people throughout the world. I'm not sure that we can say that about the manifesto, but in its heyday it certainly did interpret history and interpret humanity in graphic terms. The manifesto, which he wrote then with Friedrich Engels, his closest friend at the time,

This critical point of his life, having just arrived in London and publishing this tract which was to set the tone for the revolutionary movement throughout the world. The manifesto that was to describe in dramatic terms in its first part, almost in the sense of a Greek tragedy, the way in which the bourgeoisie had, as he said, performed a revolutionary role, having put down the feudal economy and put in its place this revolutionary capitalist economy. But the time of the bourgeoisie had now passed. And Marx argues that this great Greek tragic hero that had performed this revolutionary role by eliminating feudalism had now also outlived its day and the proletariat would soon replace it. The inexorable, inevitable nature of history, this is what Rousseau had not given us. The historical determinism that we find in the communist manifesto. This assurance that communism will come, not only because it should come, but because it must come. It is inevitable. It is inevitable because the system of capitalism has within it fundamental flaws. And that system is flawed by its gross capacity for establishing gross disparity of wealth. That is, it cannot control its own avarice. Its competitiveness is one thing. Its failure to cooperate in any terms is another thing. Above all, it is vitiated by this tragic flaw, in terms of Greek tragedy, the tragic flaw that within itself it has this hubristic capacity to do itself in. It does itself in then. It self-destructs as a result of its unending greed. It just cannot control its avarice. Marx has then the blend of the Hebraic prophet looking around him and saying, this is unfair, this is unjust, that so few people should control so much money and that so many people should be without. And he ties this to a grand view of the inevitability of history that what must come about is the doom of capitalism because that system does not deserve to exist. It must self-destruct. History proclaims its doom. All of that was marvelously set forth in the first part of the Communist Manifesto. And in the second part, he sets forth his vision of the heroes who will put that system away. And that is the heroes who call themselves communists who will form the leadership of the proletariat and manage to take history on, as it must be taken, into a truly human and humane society. That vision set forth at age 30 in the Communist Manifesto was what dynamized Marxism for so long. And there are parts of it, it seems to me, that are right and true. That is the way in which the gross disparity of wealth is still with us. And I want to talk about that more in a few moments. But there are parts of it that have been discredited too. And that is the determinism, the inevitability, the sense that this not only should come about, but it must come about as a result of this tragic flaw. That, it seems to me, we can rightly question. Because Marx, in the Rousseauian tradition, in the moralist tradition, speaks to us and speaks to our consciences this sense of justice that we all feel. But in the tradition of economic determinism, he speaks to another kind of tradition, a tradition of determinism which, it seems to me, can be easily discredited. It may be that equality should come about, but there is no sense, certainly in terms of recent history, that it must come about, that it is somehow predestined. But now the system, the capitalist system, controls our values, Marx says, by socializing us into roles of domination or submission. And here I think he is at his best in picking up a theme that is in Rousseau, but not fully developed. That is, when Rousseau begins the social contract and says that man is born free, but everywhere he is in chains, then Rousseau goes on to say that the person who thinks he is master is not, because both the master and the slave are ensnared in this trap that is of domination and submission. Marx turns to this theme that all people are alienated, because they are all caught in this web of self-alienation, and develops it. He talks about our desire for sex, for example. That desire for sex is natural, and it is good, but not the desire for prostitution, which so pervades the society that he was living in and continues to be a part of our capitalist system. It is prostitution that has distorted this basic innate desire for sex and turned it into a desire for domination, and perhaps for submission. When we buy into that domination-submission syndrome, then Marx says, we are guilty of the worst sins of capitalism. It is to Marx's enormous credit that he speaks for the liberation of women, seeing women as a class that are eternally dominated and turned into unequal objects. When he speaks about how prostitution must ultimately give way to a sense of equality among the sexes, because all women, from Marx's point of view, are prostitutes in a capitalist society, given the degree of domination of the female sex by the male sex. Capitalist patriarchy, from Marx's point of view, must occur, because the two enforce one the other. Capitalism enforces sexism. Capitalism insists that women occupy this permanently inferior role. Capitalism exploits women, and to Marx's credit, he manages early in his works, in the middle of the 19th century, to insist that women must be liberated. It is in their liberation, he says, that society will be fulfilled, and he is certainly one of the earliest feminists in this sense. It is because, he says, in the capitalist system that we are taught that domination is admirable, that we are part of this capitalist patriarchy. So sex is expressed, this natural desire for sex is expressed in the domination of women by men. Capitalism works against natural human love relationships by fostering inequality, in terms of gender, as well as in terms of money, class. Now Marx emphasizes most how our need for work is distorted in capitalist society, that because of vast concentrations of wealth, and the domination by the rich, that those who engage in everyday labor are necessarily alienated, and the natural need for work is turned into an alienated activity. Never before in political philosophy has the concept of work been developed as it is now in Marx, in the context of his writings on alienated labor. This is original. Marx asks then, in his early philosophical manuscripts written in 1844, the key question, what constitutes the alienation of labor? First he replies that the work becomes external to the worker, that it's not part of his nature, and that consequently he does not fulfill himself in his work, but denies himself, has a feeling of misery rather than well-being as he works, cannot develop freely his mental and physical energies, because he is so physically exhausted and mentally debased by the process of work. His work then cannot be voluntary, it cannot be creative or imaginative, because it is imposed, it's forced on him. It's not the satisfaction of a need, but only a means for satisfying other needs. Its alien character is clearly shown by the fact that as soon as there is no physical or other compulsion, the work is avoided. It's avoided like the plague. External labor is labor in which man alienates himself. The external character of work for the worker is shown by the fact that it's not his own work, but work for someone else always, that in work he cannot really belong to himself, but to another person. Now I cannot tell you how often I've received comments from students who have graduated from Columbia and Barnard and gone out into the work world and write to me, you know, when you read that passage from Marx on alienated labor, I confess, it didn't mean all that much to me. But now, now that I've worked in the corporate world, for example, now I know what Marx is talking about, because when he uses the term that work is external to me and that I cannot identify with it, I cannot put myself in that process of work, that the product which I create is not part of me, and I cannot feel myself as part of that product. Now finally I feel that. And sometimes people will write to me a year after they've graduated, sometimes ten or twenty years, because I've been teaching this political theory course now for twenty-six years, and I have quite a few students out there who have been in the corporate world or the world of the professions. We train people for entering that world. And as they write back to me, their refrain is this. Why is it that I've spent so much of my life, so many of my hours engaged in an activity that I've come to hate? Why should I feel that the activity itself cannot be part of me? Why is it that as Marx says in his, remember the words, it's alien in character is clearly shown by the fact that as soon as there is no physical or other compulsion, it's avoided like the plague. Why is it, they say, that as I'm working as a paralegal, eighty, ninety hours a week, as the hours accumulate more and more, I begin to think only of my escape from it and how there is that vacation maybe in Bermuda, if only I can get away long enough, if only we can save enough for this. No sense then of joy in the creative output of the work, only a sense of being debased by it or being terribly, and this is the point that they make over and over again, bored by it, just prostituted by this work. And as they speak to me as a teacher, I wonder what are we doing when we teach as we do, that if only we can make it through this system, we can enter that wonderful world of the professions. What Marx was saying then is what we must be saying now, and that is whether or not one is a yuppie or a member of the proletariat, there is this awful fate often waiting for people, and that is the awful fate of finding in work meaningless, boring, tedious activity. That is a comment on Marx's relevance. I think that we're faced, as Marx would say, with a problem in capitalist society, and that is whether we're workaholics and addicted to the process of work, unable to control ourselves, so involved in this wretched activity, or whether we've emancipated ourselves from that workaholic attitude and have become unemployed completely, we're nevertheless victimized by the system because we're unable to find the creative and original work that we really need. That is the need of our species being, and it is here that Marx's vision comes in, because remember the sets of needs, needs for subsistence, which must be fulfilled, the reason why we work, the need for sex, which can only be fulfilled in terms of humanity, in love and not in prostitution, and then the need for work, which can be fulfilled alone in creative and imaginative work in which we can really feel ourselves in that product. Marx's vision then culminates in this third and last phase of his historical progression, where the species self replaces the alienated self and the capitalist system yields to the communist system. In the Communist Manifesto, he forecasts that in place of the old bourgeois society with its classes and class antagonisms, we shall have an association in which the free development of each is the condition for the free development of all. Now that line becomes extremely important as he develops his later works. So we want to look at it, the free development of each is the condition for the free development of all. Free development meaning in that sense giving an individual the opportunity to progress in a society, to improve himself or herself. One's own freedom in that society cannot come about unless all are free. And that is the essence of the species being society, that is in which we enter as a species in a common quest, in a common opportunity. And that quest, that search is for the development of the entire society in an equal sense and not only for a few. And then he goes on, in a higher phase of communist society, after the enslaving subordination of the individual to labor, after this is vanished, after labor has become not only a means of life, but life's fulfillment, after the productive forces have also increased with the all-round development of each individual and all the springs of cooperative, not competitive wealth flow more abundantly. Only then can the narrow horizon of bourgeois society be crossed and society now inscribe on its banner from each according to his ability, to each according to his needs. And that becomes the motto, the slogan for communist society, the society that Marx sees as fulfilling us. And once again the line, from each according to his ability, to each according to his needs. The needs now become human needs, especially needs of work, that individuals all with their various abilities will build. The hallmark then of the communist society is social, economic, sexual equality. The substantive needs of each will be fulfilled for all and there will be security and equity for all. The need for sex will be expressed in love and the need for work will find fulfillment in individually meaningful labor. That is the vision, that's the promise. Now it certainly has been derided and discredited, perhaps wholly dismissed, this vision since the collapse of the communist states. As we've mentioned before, Marx has been widely deemed irrelevant. And the question that I want to conclude with, is it true that this irrelevance, if we associate irrelevance with Marx, is that true? An article in the British periodical, The Economist, which is a highly reputable conservative journal, wrote this about how Marx remains relevant. The article read, Plato told his pupil Aristotle that within any organization, nobody should earn more than five times as much as the lowliest worker. But, the Economist says, things do change. The chief executive of a big American firm can now expect to earn more than one million a year, at least 40 times as much as an ordinary production worker. Inequality in America narrowed from 1929 until 1969. But then, after 1969, it began to widen with a vengeance. So that in 1992, the top 20% of American households received 11 times as much income as the bottom 20%. The article goes on, in other industrial countries too, the gap between rich and poor has widened over the past decade or two. In Britain, the Commission for Social Justice painted a grim picture of poverty amid wealth. If Marx's prediction of a proletariat plunged into abject misery under capitalism has so far been unfulfilled, the widening gap between haves and have-nots is causing some to think that Marx might yet be proved right on this point after all. That was the Economist, writing last year, just a year ago. Still more recent studies reported this October and November in the New York Times confirm that, to quote one article, the income gap between rich and poor is wider in the United States during the last decade than in any large industrialized country. The latest study reported by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development provides data that economists have used, such as Lester Thurow, for example. Now, Thurow wrote an article entitled, How Much Inequality Can a Democracy Take? And he argued that in the United States, the degree of economic disparity or inequality in the distribution of wealth is entirely unprecedented in our history. He warned that, in his words, if the democratic political process cannot reverse this shocking trend to inequality, democracy itself will eventually be discredited. The democratic tradition in the United States has always consisted of two conceptual strands, two promises that our founding fathers, and especially Thomas Jefferson, held before us. The truly great ideas of liberty and equality. Yet democracies seem often unable to satisfy both ideals or demands. And in truth, it often happens that the democratic dilemma boils down to this. The more liberty, the less equality. And the more equality, the less liberty. That is the problem, that we cannot seem to satisfy both. Marx, with Rousseau, represents the ideal of equality and speaks to our commitment to the promise inherent in the democratic ideal that we must address, must address if we are to be concerned not just with one strand, the strand of liberty, but with the other strand, the strand of equality. As long as the present trend towards increasing inequality lasts in America, and it is a trend that is increasing by all accounts with shocking, alarming regularity, Marx remains valid as long as this trend continues. We cannot begin to fulfill the promise of our democratic ideal without addressing what Marx and Rousseau are both talking about, and that is the reality of inequality. Finally, Marx in speaking to the concept of power over people gives us a concept that others had not, and that is the reality of economic power. When we look to Marx, we look to a prophet, a prophet along with the ancient Hebraic prophets of Elijah and Amos and Isaiah who try to awaken our sense of justice. But he's also a philosopher, and he's a philosopher of the economy, and he points to power in this precise manner. So when we think of power after Marx, we may certainly disagree with Marx that economics matters as much as it does. We may agree with Marx, but above all we cannot ignore him, and that is his greatness as a philosopher. We must not avert our eyes from this challenge.
