This, our last 16th lecture, is on Mahatma Gandhi, on his political theory of inclusion, on how his ideas of freedom, truth, nonviolence, equality, relate to his conception of power. His real name was Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi. Mahatma is an honorific title, meaning great soul, that was given to him by the Indian poet Rabindranath Tagore in 1919, when Gandhi first assumed leadership of the Indian independence movement. He was born on October 2nd, 1869, the same year as we noted before that Emma Goldman was born, and 20 years before Hitler. Born in a small town on the western coast of India, called Porbandar. He was educated near there first, and then went on to London for a law degree, which he received in 1891. He tried to practice law after that first in India, but as a young man failed in his first attempts, and so quite serendipitously went to South Africa to represent a member of the Indian minority community living there. He intended to stay for only a short time in South Africa, but as it happened, he soon became involved in the Indian minority struggle for civil rights in that country, and he eventually stayed 21 years, mostly as leader of the movement for civil rights there in the Indian community. During this time, he became disillusioned with the potency of legal methods to combat racism in South Africa, and so in 1906, a critical moment in his life, after he had been there for 13 years, he first resorted to civil disobedience. At that moment, he had not read Henry David Thoreau's essay. He was to read it shortly after, and find that Thoreau confirmed all of his early instincts. But in September, on September 11th, 1906, Gandhi first led a mass of 3,000 Indians against a law, a discriminatory law in South Africa, and he was so successful in his prosecution of that civil rights movement, of his civil disobedience campaign, that one followed after another. Indians went to prison in South Africa to resist the racist legislation of the white government there, and finally, when he left for India in 1914, he was convinced that he had found, in South Africa, the model for the method that he would use in India to lead the Indian independence movement. Indeed, that method was successful, and when we look at Gandhi's development of it in South Africa, we can only briefly mention it now, we can say that even though it did have an impact in, for a time, liberalizing the laws of South Africa vis-a-vis the Indian minority community, nevertheless, this is true, that it was not what Gandhi did for South Africa that was so important. It was what South Africa did for Gandhi, in giving Gandhi a method of action, which he called Satyagraha, a concept that we'll be examining more closely, which means the power of nonviolence. British imperialism, as you know, was such a large power in the world during this time, during the first half of this century, that the British had established their colonial rule in both South Africa and India. Indeed, the sun never set on the British Empire, as the British, especially Winston Churchill, liked to say, because the British had established their colonies all the way through Africa and then across the Middle East. British India, as it was called, included at that time Pakistan, India, Sri Lanka, then Ceylon, Burma, Bangladesh. It's extraordinary that they managed to control 400 million people on that subcontinent of India, with no more than 100,000 Britons there at any one time. And so thus, outnumbered by the Indians, 4,000 to one, the British managed, from 1858 until India gained its independence in 1947, to establish control over that country, as no imperial power ever has any time in the world. Indeed, as we look at the British presence throughout the world at that time, we can only stand in awe of what they managed to do. Never before in the history of imperialism had so few people on that island of only 60 million controlled so many throughout the entire world. For such a long time, their presence in India began as early as 1600, and with such so few means of technological support. India, of all the colonies then in this immense British empire at this time, was regarded as the jewel in the crown, because the resources of the Indian subcontinent were so vast for Britain to exploit, and they did it with a systematic energy. While British trade with India had started in 1600, and their rule, as I said, began officially in 1858, the Indian movement for independence didn't begin until 1885. And from 1885 until India gained independence in 1947, this movement built more and more force. It did not obtain a mass following until 1919, when Gandhi, with all of his genius, assumed power over it. Until that time, from 1885 until 1919, it was badly divided between two factions, the moderates or the liberals, who wanted at best to gain rights within India as British citizens, emulating Britain and using only constitutional law-abiding methods, the moderates or the liberals on the one hand, and then the extremists, many of them terrorists on the other. This split between the two factions within the Indian independence movement from 1885 until 1919 virtually crippled the movement by 1919. When Gandhi then assumed leadership of it with his new method of nonviolent non-cooperation, it brought to the movement not just an energy and a dynamic, but a mass following that it had never had before. By 1919, Gandhi then captured the imagination of the Indian people with this method of satyagraha, of nonviolent power. But the very effectiveness of his use of it provoked extremely harsh retaliation from the British colonial government. And the worst episode of this repression of the movement by the British has gone down in history as the Amritsar Massacre, a graphic example of the British Empire's use of its power. The Amritsar Massacre began at 4 p.m. on Sunday, April 13th, 1919, when General Reginald Dyer, a distinguished British war hero serving now in the Indian Army, marched 50 troops into the town square of Amritsar in northern India. The town square was about as big as a football field. And that crowd that had assembled there, some of them for political reasons, as part of the civil disobedience movement, some of them there, 10,000 of them at all, just for the religious holiday or a holiday that extended to both the Hindu and the Sikh community, had no idea of what was to happen. Dyer positioned his troops, the 50 crack rifles, around the high ground within this square and fired relentlessly into the crowd without any warning. In 10 minutes, 379 men, women, and children were killed and 1,500 wounded. Later, Dyer explained his action. He said he wanted to set a firm example of law and order in India so that the civil disobedience movement against the British imperial government would not gain force. At the time of the Amritsar Massacre, Gandhi had only just assumed leadership of the Indian independence movement and begun the civil disobedience action. This was his first real test. As word of the massacre swept India, the violent terrorist elements that were challenging Gandhi at every moment within the movement demanded British blood. Gandhi's response became the historic marker of the movement, the line that would give it its energy henceforth. He said, an eye for an eye and the whole world goes blind. He said that we see now that not only the Indians have been victimized by British imperialism, the British themselves have shown how they've been dehumanized by it. The system has managed to infect the souls of us all. What we must do is to become not more like General Dyer by responding with violence, but rather we must show the world a new method of action and escalate the campaign, not with the terrorists through violence, but rather through nonviolence. And escalated it did, so that Arnold Toynbee once wrote, reflecting back on the movement in India, that so much has been written of what Gandhi did for India, but in fact, as Toynbee, the British historian, said, we should write more of what Gandhi did for Britain, because there would have been many more Amritsars had it not been for Gandhi. He extended a hand of nonviolence, asking the British to cooperate with him to get out of the pit, the pit into which both groups, Indians and British alike, had descended. His attempt then was to break this cycle of violence. The world had no right to expect anything like this movement. Rather, we've seen over and again that one violent thrust is always countered by another, that is, that one nation or one movement, when it experiences a moment of violence, sees it necessary to respond in kind, an eye for an eye. And Gandhi showed that something different could happen in this world. And as he showed that, he indicated, too, that mass action was not only of the kind that had been experienced in Germany. The masses could join in a movement of another kind, a richer and a nobler kind, and so elevate the whole standard of politics, giving it a kind of grandness that we had seldom seen before or, for that matter, since. Nehru had a, I'm sorry, Gandhi had a close associate who eventually became Prime Minister of India. His name was Jawaharlal Nehru. And Nehru was Prime Minister from 1947 until he died in 1963. Very close to Gandhi, but also critical of Gandhi's leadership. And Nehru wrote in his book called The Discovery of India, a book that Nehru wrote while he was imprisoned by the British, about Gandhi's leadership. And it's a comment that I'd like to note now and compare with Otto Strasser's comment about Hitler. Both of them seek to explain the reasons for the kinds of leadership that we see in Gandhi and in Hitler. And just as, in a sense, as we've said, the causes, the results, the nature of Hitler's movement seemed to be often shrouded in mystery. It's very difficult to explain precisely how he managed to do as he did. In like manner, Gandhi's movement is also inexplicable. Whenever we have extremes of violence, nonviolence of this kind, we find ourselves hard put to explain them. In the case of Gandhi's movement, I think Nehru's comment on Gandhi explains his success as well as Strasser's comment on Hitler. Nehru wrote in The Discovery of India, when Gandhi came to us, he was like a powerful current of fresh air that made us stretch ourselves and take deep breaths, like a beam of light that pierced the darkness and removed the scales from our eyes. He was like a whirlwind that upset many things, but most of all the working of people's minds. He did not descend from the top. He seemed to emerge from the millions of Indians, speaking their language and incessantly drawing attention to them and their appalling condition. The essence of his teaching was fearlessness. The greatest gift for an individual or a nation, so we had been told in our ancient books, was abhaya, that is, fearlessness. Not merely bodily courage, but the absence of fear from the mind. Janaka and Yajnavalkya had said at the dawn of our history that it was the function of the leaders of a people to make them fearless. But the dominant impulse in India under British rule was that of fear, pervasive, oppressing, strangling fear, fear of the army, the police, the widespread British secret service, fear of the official class, fear of laws meant to suppress and of prison, fear of the landlord's agent, fear of the money lender, fear of unemployment and starvation, which were all on the threshold. It was against this all-pervading fear that Gandhi's quiet and determined voice was raised, be not afraid. So suddenly, as it were, that black pole of fear was lifted from the people's shoulders, not wholly, of course, but to an amazing degree. A sea change was visible as the need for falsehood and furtive behavior lessened. It was a psychological change that Gandhi created, almost as if some expert in psychoanalytical methods had probed deep into the patient's past, found the origins of his complexes, exposed them to his view, and thus rid him of that burden. And notice how that compares with Strasser's comment. Remember, Strasser says that Hitler, as almost an expert in psychology, managed to speak, his words were like arrows going to their target. He spoke to the German mass unconscious, and he liberated that unconscious of its deepest feelings, its innermost desires, every word going to the raw wounds in the German psyche. And it seems to follow from that, when a leader does that kind of thing, when he speaks in that way to the unconscious elements, we're Freudian enough, perhaps, to think of the unconscious as being filled with aggression and brutality. And once the masses, following Freud's analysis, are liberated, then they will rise up as one, like a great beast. It was not that way in India. Gandhi, too, spoke to the complexes, to the unconscious. It was, as Nehru said, as if some expert in psychoanalytical methods had probed deep into the patient's past, found out the origins of his complexes, exposed them to his view, and thus rid him of that burden. It is not necessary that violence follows from such an exposure. Nonviolence can as well, and that seems to me to be a refutation of Freud's position, as consequentially as any we can find. That is, when the Indian people rose up, they followed Gandhi in a disciplined manner, insisting, as the British could not of themselves, on abiding by nonviolence. And Gandhi insisted that his followers accept nonviolence not merely as a tactic, but as a creed. And just as Hitler believes in violence as a creed, so Gandhi believed in nonviolence as a creed. We have two different situations here, alike in the sense that we have charismatic leaders appealing to the mass unconscious, almost as if they were psychoanalytical experts, these charismatic leaders carrying a message, and that is, you will be empowered, and as they are empowered, what do they do? They do not always act as the German nation acted. The point is that charismatic leadership, mass movements, they do not always produce totalitarian movements, or always produce fascism. People, when they think of mass movements, sometimes think of them in such derogatory fashion. They group all mass movements together and say, well, it's inevitable that we're going to have fascism or communism or totalitarianism, etc. One person has said, after looking at mass movements in this century, that the only good movement is a bowel movement, because after all, all movements are so terrible. We've lost tens of millions of people as a result of them. We should note this, that this is a good movement. The movement in India was a good movement as a result of making a choice, and that choice was for nonviolence rather than violence. There was a terrorist party in India in 1919 that was calling for the blood of the English after Amritsar. If the Indian people had chosen to follow that terrorist movement, one of the most viable and vigorous terrorist movements in the world at that time, Indian history could have been very different. But they chose to follow Gandhi. That choice is significant. Now, that choice was a choice of liberation. It was a choice that led to the independence of India after this long period of servitude. It was a choice, though, that was so liberating. Why? Because, as Nehru says, their complexes were exposed to their views. The fear, the fear that was within them was such a burden, and Gandhi managed to, as best as any leader can, deal with that fear in a constructive manner. And so this takes us to the first of the concepts that I want to look at today, and that is the idea of freedom, or, in Gandhi's terms, the word swaraj, S-W-A-R-A-J. Raj or freedom means rule over, and swa means one's own. So the word literally means rule over oneself. Freedom then means the kind of discipline and order within oneself that can liberate oneself from what? From illusion, from ignorance, but above all, from fear. You might recall the story that I told in connection with the Chandogya Upanishad in the lecture on Hinduism, the very first one that we gave about the rope over in the corner of the room, and the individual enters the room and thinks it's not a rope at all, it's a cobra. And since the room is darkened, he can't tell, but he comes back, and the room is a bit lighter, and he sees, no, maybe not, cobra, leaves the room, needs to come back into the room for something, and comes back, and still later when the room is fully light, and he sees, no, it's just a rope hanging there. Well, from Gandhi's point of view, the reality is often colored by fear, and we have to dispel the illusions, in this case the illusion of the superiority of British imperial rule in India, and that somehow the British, by virtue of being white, as they told the Indians, had a providential mission there to liberate these heathens. Well, from this point of view, from Gandhi's point of view, we must deal with that fear, and we can deal with that fear of the British through a process of liberation that means we gain more insight into ourselves, and we go back to the whole idea of the journey, a journey that as we saw was, in a sense, thrown into disrepute by Hitler's journey in Mein Kampf, but now Gandhi rehabilitates the idea of the journey, arguing that the

journey can be meaningful, and indeed one's own freedom depends upon that journey. So what does freedom mean in this sense? When Gandhi assumed leadership of the movement, there were Indian intellectuals arguing that freedom meant this, freedom meant political independence, get the British out and we will have freedom. Gandhi argued that's a part of freedom, certainly we want the British to depart, but it's not the most important part of our concept of freedom. Freedom to be complete must be not just political, that may result in simply replacing a white oligarchy with a brown oligarchy, freedom must mean more than that, it must mean through the journey of the individual, the capacity of each self to overthrow the illusions of fear and of ignorance that we find. So Swaraj, rule over oneself, has that key concept within it of self-mastery, of self-discipline. It is the journey that allows an individual, ultimately of course, to discover that his self or her self is in a state of harmony or union with all selves, that's the essence of the journey. Freedom then, freedom as Gandhi says has both an outward and an inward aspect. The outward aspect is political independence, getting the British out of India. They've been here long enough, we need to replace them with our own government, partly, that's part of freedom. But the other part is for Indians to liberate themselves in a psychological sense of these, as Nehru said, this long period of oppression. And so for that liberation, the journey is all important. He talked about Indians liberating themselves from the gender oppression that existed in India at that time, that is the way in which a patriarchy had been so firmly established. He talked about the way in which Indians must liberate themselves from this horrendous institution of untouchability, and the way in which long before the British came, the domination of the untouchables by the higher castes was part of their tradition. He talked about the Indians liberating themselves from the enmity that existed between Hindus and Muslims, between Hindus and Sikhs. And he said, if we get the British out of India, and this domination continues, domination of women, domination of the untouchables, domination of Muslims by Hindus, if this continues, it will be a hollow victory indeed, to have managed this. We will have the British out, but we will be stuck ourselves with this oppression within us, and that is not so easy to overcome. So freedom then is necessarily linked by Gandhi with a process of internal searching for what course of life is best, and this process has to last a lifetime. Gandhi believed that our purpose then is to liberate ourselves from attitudes of exclusivity, the kind of politics of exclusion that we saw last time in the discussion of Hitler. The tyranny of a dictator is one thing, the tyranny of wrong attitudes within oneself is another, and we have to emancipate ourselves from those. That is his lesson. So when he talked about squarage, he said, the outward freedom of independence that we shall attain must be only in exact proportion to the inward freedom to which we may have grown at a given moment. If this is the correct view of freedom, as I think it is, our chief energy must be concentrated first and foremost upon achieving revolution from within. Self-government depends entirely upon our internal strength, upon our ability to fight against the heaviest odds. Indeed, self-government, which does not require that continuous striving to attain it and sustain it, is not worth the name. The government then of squarage that we want is government over conscience. And he says, the only tyranny that I will accept is the tyranny of the still small voice within. Well, that idea of escalating, notice the superego in Freudian terms, of the conscience now to a position of authority, I think it's an idea that certainly has to be taken in part from Thoreau. It's an idea, though, that Gandhi speaks to, the importance of the individual conscience in this whole process of self-searching. The journey now, once again, becomes all-important, and its roots are in Thoreau, as well as, of course, in Buddha and deeply in the Hindu tradition. Gandhi relates his idea of freedom to truth, in that he believes that the quest for psychological liberation leads us to the highest truth that we spoke of in the very first lecture on Hinduism, remember, the truth that the Indians call satya, S-A-T-Y-A. Satya is a word that is derived from the Sanskrit root sat, which means being, and that we must, if we are to attain the highest truth, as we saw in that first lecture, become aware of the essence of being, the nature of being, and the highest truth, as remember we've said since, is that we are all part of one another, that the truly enlightened person is one who can see oneself in all being and all being in oneself. That lesson, which is repeated in Hinduism, over and again becomes the mantra of Gandhi's movement and his thought. It guides all else. It dictates the reason why nonviolence must necessarily follow. That is, this idea that we're all part of one another, quite obviously, relates to the idea of nonviolence, and that if we harm another person, we're harming ourselves. And so the word for nonviolence, ahimsa, A-H-I-M-S-A, ahimsa, means then this, that we enter into a state of being with others in which we realize that to do violence in any way, in thought or in deed to another, is dehumanizing ourselves, is taking away our own humanity, our own decency. And as he spoke to the British on this, he again and again said, don't you see after Emirates what you have done to yourselves? And that message eventually, of course, got through, and the British today, in the case of the writing of Arnold Toynbee that I mentioned, look back and they see imperialism as a fundamentally debasing and dehumanizing institution, because it set up and institutionalized a domination submission syndrome that was just awesomely wrong. This universal truth, as we said, is attained only through a quest, and we go back to the idea of the Socratic quest. The idea of Swaraj involves self-discipline, self-searching, it involves tolerance of other contending candidates for truth, because to do violence even to other ideas, other candidates for truth, is to violate our own. And so Gandhi's ideas of truth and non-violence have to begin with three key components that I've just indicated. One is, remember, the central belief that the highest truth is the unity of all being. Two, that the method of choice to get to this realization must be non-violence, and non-violence often in a very pragmatic sense. People like John Stuart Mill pointed out that if we want to have freedom in a society, we need to have competition in the marketplace of ideas, and if we eliminate all of the competitors, then the one dominant idea, the idea that monopolizes over others, will therefore go to sleep, a dogma becomes dead. Well, from Gandhi's point of view, we keep the stimulation alive, we keep it going by tolerating other beliefs. They give us something as we continue our search, and so the practical reason for this is that we need the stimulation from contesting forces. And he accepted Mill's argument on liberty completely, of a free marketplace of ideas being necessary. I said that the first element in his conceptions of truth and non-violence were the central belief that the highest truth is the unity of all being, and then the method of non-violence and of tolerance. And then after that, an idea that we met when we talked about Emma Goldman, but that came about first in Gandhi, and that is the conviction of this essential connection between means and ends. Over and again he argued that we reap as we sow, and this was a point that Goldman had made well. Now, Gandhi wrote about these conceptions in this light. He began by saying, truth, or satya, resides in every human heart, and one has to search for it there, and to be guided by truth as one sees it. But no one has a right to coerce others to act according to his own view of truth. I am but a seeker after truth. I claim to have found a way to it. I claim to be making a ceaseless effort to it, but I admit that I've not yet found it. To find truth completely is to realize oneself and one's destiny, to become perfect. I'm painfully conscious of my imperfections, and therein lies all the strength that I possess, because it's a rare thing for a man to know his own limitations. Therefore I claim to have no infallible guidance or inspiration. So far as my experience goes, the claim to infallibility on the part of a human being would be untenable. The argument then that truth, truth is the unity of all being, but in order to understand that one engages in a quest, a search, and one pursues then that truth, one never possesses the truth. One is only in a quest, pursuit of it, in order to discover its essential core. If one possessed the truth, as Gandhi said, he would become perfect. He argues that his sense of his own limitations has driven him to this conclusion, that he claims no infallibility. Imagine if Hitler had said anything remotely like this. If he could have, say, stood before a mirror and looked at himself and said, you know, you're not infallible, you don't have the truth, remind yourself of your own limitations. It's just inconceivable, and there must have been something deeply rooted in the personality that as he conceived of the whole movement, it seems to me it's often symbolized in the gestures of the Nazi movement as compared to the Indian movement. The Nazi movement is Sieg Heil, hail to victory, and Sieg Heil is obviously an aggressive movement, whereas Gandhi's movement is symbolized by the Namaste, I bow to you. And that Namaste says a lot for the way in which a movement is symbolized. The symbolism is all important. So I mentioned about the means and ends. Gandhi said means and ends are convertible terms in my philosophy of life. The belief that there is no connection between the means and the end is a great mistake. The means may be likened to a seed, the end to a tree, and there is just the same inviolable connection between the means and the end as there is between the seed and the tree. We reap exactly as we sow. They say sometimes means are after all means. I would say means are after all everything. As the means, so the end. There is no wall of separation between means and end. Realization of the goal is in exact proportion to that of the means. This is a proposition that admits of no exception. Ahimsa or nonviolence and truth are so intertwined that it's practically impossible to disentangle and separate them. Nevertheless, ahimsa or nonviolence must be the only means. Truth is the end that can be attained only through nonviolence. Therefore I cannot ever believe in short violent cuts to success. I am an uncompromising opponent of violent methods even to serve the noblest of causes. There is, therefore, really no meeting ground between the school of violence and myself. I couldn't possibly have stated it more clearly then. For practical, for theoretical, for political, for moral reasons, nonviolence is the method that must be used in this pursuit of truth. Now Gandhi's fourth concept after Swaraj and Satya and ahimsa, that is freedom and truth and nonviolence, the fourth concept is that of power, which pervades the others, the power of nonviolence. And he groups these together under the word Satyagraha, that is Satya, S-A-T-Y-A, and then G-R-A-H-A. Satyagraha means just the power that is generated by truth and nonviolence. It means the energies that are released and transform a situation, liberating reserves of feeling in ways that acts of love or compassion often do. Gandhi assumes that the means of nonviolence are superior, both in a moral and practical sense to the means of violence, because there's a force contained in the emotions of love and compassion that can be every bit as strong and sometimes more effective than those in hatred or in the desire to inflict harm on others. Often the former are not fully realized because they're not filled in thought as well as in deed. And so Gandhi sought to explain the full force of Satyagraha when he said, the word Satyagraha, that is the power of nonviolence, is often most loosely used and is made to cover veiled violence. But as the author of the word, he coined the word himself, I may be allowed to say that it excludes any form of violence, direct or indirect, veiled or unveiled, and whether in thought, word or deed. It's a breach of Satyagraha to wish ill to an opponent or to say a harsh word to him or of him with the intention of doing harm. And often the evil thought or the evil word may, in terms of Satyagraha, be more dangerous than actual violence used in the heat of the moment. Therefore Satyagraha is gentle. It never wounds. It must not be the result of anger or malice. It was conceived of as a complete substitute for violence. Now that's the theory, you see, that it is always gentle, it never wounds, an old Sanskrit saying that the truth must always be told, but it can always be told nonviolently. And so the link between satya and ahimsa, is that true? Is the most direct and honest truth? Is it capable always of being expressed in a way that is gentle and will not wound? That's the question, I think, that Gandhi and Gandhi's movement poses. A nonviolent power, then, demonstrates the force of nonviolent energy through the example of thoroughly determined individuals in quest of liberation, but individuals that are determined not to use violence. This theory is best conveyed, I think, by looking at the actual circumstances of some of his Satyagraha campaigns, the Salt March, the Calcutta Fast, in which Gandhi confronted the British. And as in the Salt March of 1930, he confronts them with this army of nonviolent resistors, an army that is pledged to the creed of nonviolence. And as they march, some of you perhaps have seen Richard Attenborough's splendid depiction of this in the film with Ben Kingsley called Gandhi, and the way in which those marchers, leaving Gandhi's ashram in Ahmedabad on March 12, 1930, and then gathering force as those 80 people march towards the sea to gather natural salt, and so defy the tax that the British have placed upon salt. And as they reach that ocean on the western coast of India, not far from where Gandhi was born in Burbundur in the little town of Dundee, it's as if they had begun as a trickle and become a stream and then a river into the ocean. And they represent, truly, the force of nonviolence, the way in which, when the British view this, they are unable to come to terms with it, unable because it is so purely nonviolent. And it opens up within the British a real ambivalence. Can we arrest these people? What have they done, except marching to the sea, yes, to violate a law, that is, they are engaging in civil disobedience, picking up this salt, this natural salt, and therefore defying our salt tax, but what more have they done than that? They do arrest Gandhi, but only after a period, a period of time in which they are so ambivalent, and the ambivalence widens, they can't bring themselves to do it. It raises the question of, of course, the age-old question, I suppose, in theories that deal with Gandhi, whether it would have worked against the Nazis. Probably not. I think it's more likely that when Gandhi first left his ashram on that 24-day march to the sea, that Hitler's Nazis would have shot him, and that would have stopped the movement. But Gandhi's genius was to see that the British really were ambivalent about coming down on the movement, and instead of using violence, which would have resolved that ambivalence, and encouraged the British, as they in fact did when they approached, when they confronted the terrorists, to come down hard on the movement, instead of doing that, Gandhi uses nonviolence, which exacerbates the ambivalence, and makes the British pause, pause long enough for the movement to grow. It was a kind of subtle and a beautiful dance between Gandhi and the British, and it's no question that the British deserve a lot of credit, even after Amritsar, for what they did in terms of dealing with Gandhi. They never once thought, I've been through volumes and volumes of personal private correspondence among the British, they never once thought of shooting Gandhi, where I have no doubt at all that Hitler, that would have been his first thought. So we have with the British then a relatively civil group of people dealing with him, but remember there would have been more Amritsars if it hadn't been for Gandhi, and from my point of view the real credit goes to him. The concepts that I've dealt with, of freedom and truth and nonviolence and power, I suppose they end with one more, which is that of equality. Gandhi wanted the search to end in equality. Equality with freedom, because after all, if we gain freedom, we would see through our connectedness with all, that we necessarily, inevitably were on equal status with others. He argued especially and powerfully against the high caste Hindus. This institution of untouchability is deplorable. It is the worst, barring none, all the institutions of slavery that the world has conceived. For two, three thousand years it has existed in India. We must abolish it. And he was smart enough and wise enough and honest enough to go to his own Indian community and insist on the liberation of Indians by Indians, and in that process they would liberate themselves. So equality for Gandhi meant not just equality between the Indians and the British, he wanted that, but equality among members of his own society. He said at the end, I have known no distinction between relatives and strangers, countrymen and foreigners, white and colored, Hindus and Indians of other faiths, whether Muslims, Parsis, Christians or Jews. I may say that my heart has been incapable of making any such distinctions. The antithesis of what Hitler would have said. Surely when we think of Hitler, we view that movement and say, as I said at the end, no, never, ever again. With Gandhi we look back on his movement and say, oh, why not again?
