I'm not quite sure at what stage someone who has been in love or who is in love kind of sits back and says, okay What is really the nature of love? Because it goes beyond your five senses. You can't touch it. You can't see it. You can't smell it but it's like you have been Initiated into this into this world where The five senses can no longer reach you want to intellectually think about it, but all you know is that When you want to kind of apply your intellectual prowess, you realize that you're just kind of hanging on to the old narratives You know a book here a book there a paragraph there a paragraph there and it's not working out for you And in some ways I think If you're able if you're able to sit in the unknown because what happens is There are there are two poles, you know, you have you have this desire to be in love with this man You also have this newfound desire to understand the nature of love they're both like seeds The only difference is that you have been hanging out with this man for about two years And in these two years physically you have been intimate intellectually. You have created stories with this man You have an emotional relationship. So there's already a foundation built on the side This new seed says figure out what love is The nature of love, you know, it's something like Socrates would say throughout the dialogues. I'm not talking about justice In regards to what's happening in Russia or Ukraine. I want to know what justice is in itself It's an introduction to say a non-sensory definition The problem is now that this brand new seed has to fight against the seed that has already sprouted Maybe there is a stem Maybe there are leaves. Maybe there are branches. Maybe there is a trunk that's already very very thick And there is no chance For this other seed to blossom. It just gets crushed Now it doesn't mean you won't desire it. It doesn't mean that once in a while You're not inspired To kind of pursue this desire. The only problem is the gravitational pull on this end is so powerful That whatever inspiration may have existed It just disappears You know, it's kind of like one of those Things that happen to you as you age or as you gain some maturity where Because you're young because you're healthy because you're hopeful You want to extend a compassionate hand To everyone who's in need. As you get some age on you and some insight and maturity experience you realize well, you know everybody everything on this planet is There is a limited resource to everything including as a human being your time your energy your youth all that stuff and it's kind of like your The red light, you know on the dash is beginning to light up saying that you're almost empty of gas You know, you need to refuel and all of a sudden you become very mindful of how hard you're pushing the gas pedal, you know how fast you're going and You keep looking for a gas station to refuel I think when you are very very young and ambitious And when your five senses have been Contaminated in the sense that you know, one sense Has a chain around your neck another has a chain around your wrist another has a chain around your legs There is no way to become free of them. It's impossible Now you can work with someone who is young and who is hopeful who has not been Varnished by experience and he or she will say to you. I think I can heal you, you know, I can bring those Non-sensory five senses into your being or into your soul I don't think it's possible. I think it's a complete waste of time. I think there needs to come a point where Something about you just blossoms whether it's through your own Reflections life experience where you realize You have ran for the past 50 years and you have ended up absolutely nowhere And you need to have enough honesty and humility about you And you must have come to a place where you're mature enough not to express This anger all the time everywhere. It just makes you ridiculous so at this Stage you kind of say okay, you know i've done i've tried to do Bring rest to my being for the past 50 years. It's just not happening So the path i'm on is no longer working And so you become curious about perhaps other possibilities in life that may exist for you This is again Whether or not you can kind of find your place in life through the non-senses nonsense five senses They're not going to just come to you You have to because it's very difficult to kind of detach yourself from 50 years of living in your body And making judgments through your body and through what you see and what you touch and what you hear And it's very difficult to find freedom from all the memories that live inside you memories of Pleasure and hope where you want them to be repeated You know memories of pain and harm where you want to forget You can't no longer entertain those things because if you do you simply just get back Into the physical aspect of it and if you were to kind of look at them as gifts these non-physical five senses And if you were to look at them as say I don't know if you want to look at them as guests or hosts I don't really know but they kind of sit back and they have to find you worthy It's something I usually talk about in classes about the goddess of vak She's an indian goddess who lives in the throat Indians are you know, they have strange philosophies where every part of your body houses a certain deity And the philosophy is that everybody talks Including me And most of what we say is just garbage. It's just nonsense It's just to it's gossip. It's there to waste time because we don't really know what to do with quietness or silence And our physical life, you know, it's so consumed with trivial things I mean, they're important. You know, you have to talk about rent. You have to talk about moving away from oakland to Sacramento you have to talk about You know food you have to talk about what's the best school for your kids You have to kind of sit and talk about with your husband about the politics of life The compromises you have to make in relationships. I mean these things are just physical things. These are You're in life And life will possess you will own you will contaminate you And so most of our daily business really is about thinking and just talking about this stuff and so Valk because she's a goddess and because she's all about inspiration because she's about curiosity. She's about wisdom You know, she doesn't want to get involved with anybody It doesn't matter who it is who can't be a good host. So she just kind of sits and waits and waits and waits until someone gets Consumed by curiosity Not curiosity about should I move to sacramento or roosevelt? Or should I send my kid to private school or public school? Or should I go with this guy or that guy or should I break up with him today or tomorrow? These are okay things to think about and talk about But you know, it's kind of like the story of pegasus Valk in some sense looks at and says human beings have wings But these wings will never get a chance to Move to flap to fly because human beings are just contaminated. They're just pulled down by all the worries and troubles of physical life, so these Five senses that are non-physical will never be activated inside them, you know So she waits for someone to no longer be interested in these things The problem is with all of a sudden losing your interest and attraction To your physical life is that you have been around them for 50 years And now all of a sudden they're gone what's going to happen to you? now you're angry with this new relationship you have with Something that's unknown something that just kind of knocked On the door and just barged in without permission You know you look at your husband. He's a nice guy. You just don't want to be around him You got great kids, but you just don't want to be around them You have a great job, but you no longer care for it. You know, you have all these memories of your friends, but it's as if they never existed and so what Begins as inspiration and curiosity becomes your initiation into dread It's an awful place to be you know, you lose hope You wonder if there is something wrong with you Your friends are laughing and there you are just moping around everybody has a place to go You have no place to go. You don't know if you're blessed or you've been cursed I mean you employ all sorts of tricks, you know, especially these days, you know You sit and you do yoga you do meditation you read deeply you listen to chant music

maybe even you chant, in hopes of something. And there is nothing that's positive about the stage. It's a horrifying place to be because there is nothing that you can grab. There is nothing you can hang on to and pull yourself up. You're gonna just get depressed. If you have a support system, and if you're receptive enough, if you have the capacity to listen and to do, then perhaps through some teaching, through a support system, you can kind of be taken out and be trained, and then all these other senses that you're talking about will eventually kick in in time. But one of the non-physical senses that Rumi talks about is the nose, that you no longer begin to discern. You no longer begin to make conclusions or judgments or observations based on what you see and what you hear and what you touch and what you taste. It's all about smell, but this particular smell is intuitive. You know, you sit somewhere, you look at someone, and they just don't feel right. And it doesn't matter if Jesus Christ comes down to you and says, turn the other cheek. You're not going to do so because you've come at a certain place where you trust your intuition. You know what you're smelling, and you trust what you're smelling, and it doesn't smell good. Because remember, when you lose this pull towards the old life, there is no compass. There are no canons. There is no measurement. There is nothing that you can go to to find meaning or purpose or figure out whether something has meaning, has value. You're in darkness. It's kind of like the story that Rumi or Shakespeare say in regards to a man being in a dark room, and five of them, and one touches something, and he says it's a rope, and another says it's a leaf, and another says it's, I don't know, a post or a column. The light is turned on, and they realize it's an elephant, you know, the ear, and the trunk, and the legs. And you get to a place where you lose identity, confidence. You don't trust anything about you anymore. You know, I remember that when I was younger, whatever I wanted to do, the first person I would call was Hussein. The point I'm trying to make is that just because I read books, and just because I was going to gatherings, and just because I would write, and just because I would think some ridiculous infantile thoughts, it didn't mean that I was at a place where I had access to these non-sensory senses. I couldn't smell, I couldn't see, I couldn't hear. And I don't know when they kick in, and I don't know how they happen. I don't know at what stage Valk enters into you and begins to kind of speak through you. I don't know when that happens. You know, the problem, I think, with us modern folks is that because there are so many books out there, and especially self-help books, and because there is really an abundance of things, and we can get them and use them so easily, the assumption is, well, if there is something wrong with you, if you have a question, or you are dissatisfied in some shape or form, you can actually grab a book, read the book. Maybe you can have a journal and write your thoughts and feelings in this notebook. And after a few months, you're able to piece together this puzzle. You will have access to all the missing pieces. And I don't think it's true. First, I think these questions, for the longest time in human history, were really just available to very few people, very, very few people. I mean, I don't know if you've heard of Saint Bernadette. You know, she's this young girl in somewhere in France, right? You know, she is sickly. She's got two sisters, I think, and a bunch of friends. All of a sudden, you know, she has a vision. You know, she is sick. And when she had, and the problem with her sickness was that she would get tired very quickly. She would never go in cold water because then she would feel even worse. But once she has this vision, all of a sudden, it's as if, you know, she, her physical body is able to overcome, you know, all the, like, illness that lived inside of her. She's running, she's laughing. She doesn't sleep, she prays all the time. Now, modern, modernity has us believe that if you just sit and close your eyes and meditate on the image of Virgin Mary, whatever shape or form that image may be, eventually this woman will speak to you. And I don't think it's true. You know, it's kind of like what Freud had said about Saint Francis of Assisi. Assisi, very much like Jesus Christ, had mentioned that we should love everybody. You know, because love is something that is divine. And since God gives freely, and if love lives inside you as it ought to, then you should just give it freely. And Freud said, no, why would you want to do that? The truth is, some people are just not lovable. Why the hell would you want to force yourself to love someone when intuitively, instinctually, organically, you just don't love them? Because, and I think Freud is right, you know, there is a good amount of wisdom in that. I mean, we do it on a daily basis. You go out with someone, they happen to be drinking a bit too much, they just say it as it is, they're alcoholic, or they're addicted to some drug, or whatever the case may be. I mean, all of us are addicted to something. You know, some addictions could be categorized as positive and good, many can be categorized as negative and bad and harmful. So if someone is addicted to something that's just negative and harmful, well, you are not immortal. You don't have an infinite amount of energy, time, patience. There comes a point where the umbilical cord breaks, is cut, you lose your patience, you lose your stamina. We do it on a daily basis with our kids, with our companions, with our job, with yourself. Again, I don't really know much about these non-sensory five senses, but I do know that if you want to understand grief, if you want to understand loneliness, there has to come a point where you live outside of yourself, where you can look at your grief as objectively as possible without contaminating your observation with your ridiculous infantile psychological narratives. You know, I think there is something to be said about Socrates' teacher, an old woman who lives in the woods in a hut, who says, if you're here looking for philosophy, ideas, I can't give them to you. I don't really care for them, but I can teach you how to love. You know, and if you have love, you know that it is not reachable to the senses. It may have its genesis in you looking at a guy and all of a sudden your brain chemistry begins to change. And you move towards him and you talk to him and he sounds good and you shake his hand and his hand feels good. And you sit and you have a conversation. Intellectually, he sounds really, really, really good. A month later, you say, I'm completely in love with this person. From that point on, it doesn't matter if he hasn't showered for weeks. It doesn't matter if he comes to the date, you know, his shirt being like smelly and oily and has all these, it's torn apart. You don't really care about those things. To a mummy being a man-petition, that Maginot had the story of Lelia and Maginot. You know, Maginot is this guy, in Persian it means the intoxicated. She takes this young woman home to have them meet this girl, you know. The parents, when they meet this girl, they're horrified. She just doesn't look good. And they look at this Maginot who's very attractive, you know, and high in a social class. And they say to him, what is wrong with you? Are you blind? Can't you see how ugly, how unattractive this girl is? And he looks at his parents and he says, if you were to look at this girl from my eyes, through my eyes, all you would see is beauty. All of us have these moments, but you know, these moments that are gifted to us are really limited to the ridiculous obsessions that we have about various things. So we never really get to this point where we can actually look at, I can't say look at life entirely because none of us have access to the entirety of life, but we can look at life and discern some of the events that are happening in it and figure out where exactly we belong by using these other senses that, again, once in a while you experience yourself having when you fall in love.
