I had a friend some years ago, he died of a brain tumor, he was about 60 some, as he was changing lanes he just rammed into a car and he claimed that he didn't see anyone, they saw it, they scanned his brain and they realized that there's a tumor. A few weeks later he was diagnosed with stage 4 brain cancer and he died, but before his passing he had a car, I think Toyota Avalon, and the engine was making some strange sounds and he took it to a shop and they told him that the engine is no longer good, he needs to change the engine. So they bought a brand new engine from the factory for about, I don't know, two, three, four thousand and they put it in. Why would you ever want to reinvent anything? You would reinvent something because you see it in its condition and you don't like what you see, you don't like the way it sounds, you don't like the way it feels when you ride it, so there has to be a good amount of dislike, disgust, a set of negative emotions. The difference between a car engine and the human psyche is that a car engine, you can take it to a shop, they just take it out and put a new one in, it takes about a week or so. For us, talking about seeing the world in a certain way, and you see it in a certain way either temperamentally or in other words that you're just born, for the most part, introvert, you always see life as half empty or the glass is half empty and it's just part of who and what you are. As time passes, you create certain patterns of thinking, certain patterns of feeling, certain patterns of behaving, it's what they call habits. So in the human engine, you're not just dealing with the brain or just looking at something, you're dealing with 20-30 years of being a certain way. And you gain some maturity and you realize you're just exhausted by always looking at the glass half full. And then you read some books kind of like The Gay Science by Frederick Nietzsche or Václav Huzará Fustra, the same author, where he argues that you should always say yes to life. And the truth is you look yourself in the mirror after like 20-30 years or 15-16 years of living the same life, having the same feelings and going nowhere really except that. And it's very difficult for you to say yes to life because it's just filled with so much pain and sorrow, alienation. And then you turn on the TV or you go to YouTube and all of a sudden there is someone like Jordan Peterson, some guy from Canada, Dr. Oz, Dr. Phil, who is there to make you feel good, inspire you by giving you this positive thinking philosophy that if you read this book, go to that workshop or, you know, somehow you can overcome 20 years of certain habits. Reinventing is really, really, really, really, really difficult. I mean first, it's difficult seeing what you've become or what you've turned into. Then it's really difficult to get some perspectives that contradicts the one that live inside you and then constantly have them repeated to you. Either someone from the outside or you just have a mantra. It's like you wake up every morning and you brush your teeth. And you got to do this over and over and over again until this new seed can grow bigger and bigger and bigger until it overpowers, you know, all this old stuff. Can I tell you a story? A few days ago I had to go to the mortuary, wash a corpse, and then bury it. This is a very good friend of mine and he had been suffering from depression for a long, long, long, long time. I've tried for the past 30 years to lend him a hand, as much as I possibly could, without not having my own family damaged because of him. You know, it's one thing to go into your room and see it be a mess, but it's a different thing to go inside your mind and see the mess. There's nothing you can do about it. Every time you try to clean something, you realize it's connected to something else. And then you end up in a state of paralysis. You can't really do much. And so the past few days have been really tough because a couple of things that usually happens is when you realize that someone is not reachable in as much as you want to help them yank this disease out of them, there's no amount of data you have in your head, information, wisdom, whatever you want to call it. It's just not helpful. And you kind of feel incompetent and insufficient in some different areas of life. And then as you wash the corpse, one of the things that death does, it makes so many things about your life irrelevant. It really does. I mean, that's what depression is for the most part. You could be depressed about the political situation. You say, it's just way, way, way too much. I can't do much about any of this stuff. But some depressions can be inward. In other words, you know, it's like this pot of soup you have on the stove and it's been on the stove for the past, like, five years and the bottom is like thick, black junk. And you know that if you get this spoon and you start, you know, stirring it from the very bottom, all this burnt stuff will just come to the surface and everything is a mess now. You can't drink or eat the soup in any shape, form. Once you begin to play with your own head and the stuff that live in it, the truth is all the junk that lives in the bottom will eventually come to the surface. And then your breathing space is not very much. And so once you begin to play with the reality of death, you begin to ask yourself, what conversation can I really have that's meaningful? What place can I go that can nourish me to some extent? And you realize there is nowhere. And then there comes a point where you say, okay, you know, I know that I'm over 60, I know that I'm getting a little older, a little dumber, a little more incompetent, dementia and all these other diseases that will eventually visit you after a certain age. What should I do with the time left? And the truth is, I don't know. Because what I really want to do is, I want to reinvent myself and I want to reinvent my life. I just don't know what steps I need to take. Do I once in a while sit to read a book to be inspired? Yeah, but it's struggle because I don't find the sentences interesting. I mean, sure, there's a word or two that inspire me, but I have to, like, read for five hours to find a morsel. And I sit back and I say, is it really worth it? And the answer is no. So there are, I think the only response I have to your question would be the following. I go back to one of my heroes I used to work with for just a short while. His name was Jiddu Krishnamurti in the 1980s. Krishnamurti was considered to be the messiah for the 20th century. There was an organization called the Theosophical Society, founded around the 1800s and 1900s, and they had argued that after having read the Talmud, the Old Testament, the Buddhist texts, Hindu texts, that every 2,000 years there is supposed to be a messiah. That's what they calculated. They had argued that we are ready for a brand new messiah. And so there was a competition between two

kids. Christmas Huntress was about 15 and Jiddu Krishnamurti was 11. And then there was this Indian or British guy, Leadbeater, walking near the Indian River somewhere and he saw this kid coming out and he said, I see this energy around him. Point is, eventually he was considered to be the Messiah. You know, they created a cult for him. He had his own special cups, special beds, special tables, special plates. You couldn't go near him because your history would infect and contaminate him. So he lived a very, very protective life. One of the things that he used to say always was that to go very far you have to start with very near. If you want to change the engine of your car because it's just burnt out, the truth is, first you need to call a tow truck. I mean, it's great that you want to think, you know, far ahead and see yourself in this brand new car, you know, running very, very smoothly. But that will eventually make you delusional. The truth is, you need to pick up the phone, go online and figure out which tow company is closest to you. Then you have to look at your budget. Then you have to look for a mechanic that you can afford. Then you have to make sure that this is the right engine for your car and this is a good mechanic who knows what he or she is doing. Once you're done with the near, then you sit in the car. Then you can fantasize about going for Los Angeles. I think when someone, anyone who says, I want to reinvent myself, they have or they have been dealing with some issues and it doesn't mean it's negative. It's actually quite nice that you've come to a place where you realize the old philosophy of life are no longer working. The way I see life, the way I see myself, they're no longer healthy for me and I want to change. And so that's a good place to start. The next steps, I suppose, is you just read. You talk to people. You keep doing it over and over and over again. And the truth is, you're going to slip. You're going to fall back into the old world time and again. And if you're able to overcome, have you ever seen that movie Groundhog Day with Bill Murray? It was a movie that came out some other than 30, 40, 50 years ago. It's about this weatherman. He just wakes up in this town. I think it's February 2nd. And for him, every day is the same. He just wakes up in the same day. The music is the same. The streets are the same. The people are the same. The composition is the same. And he gets depressed. I mean, he really, really gets depressed to the point that he jumps from a cliff and dies. He runs into a train and dies. He does all sorts of things because nothing ever changes. At a certain point, he just grows tired of suicide. He grows tired of just living the same life. And he says, you know what, if this is going to be, you know, my life, the next time I see this kid, you know, crashing down from a tree, I'm just going to run and see him. The next time I see this homeless person, I'm just going to take him to a coffee shop and buy him soup. And the next time this guy comes to me and says, hey, Bill, do you remember from 20 years ago, I'm just going to give him a big hug. And that's what he does. And eventually, he transforms himself by falling in love. And the moment this emotion, love blossoms, he wakes up in the morning and the days have changed. The people have changed. The conversations have changed. And the point I'm trying to make is the following. You wake up with the same emotions. You wake up with the same thought patterns. You wake up with the same old life, day after day after day after day. Now, for most of us, it's okay. For most of us, it's okay. For those who have conscience, in other words, something about you wakes up and says, no, I can't do this anymore. You know, it's like you fake it in a marriage or you fake it in a relationship and you've been faking it really, really well for the past, like, five, six, seven, nine, ten years. And, you know, it puts a lot of pressure and stress on your body, both the physical body and the emotional body and the intellectual body. There is a breaking point. And even though you're physically moving from point A to point B, emotionally, you're just so exhausted. And intellectually, you just can't think anymore about a way out because there are no ways out. You've tried everything for the past 10 years. And so this breaking point, you want to leave. And you want to leave because you can't find any tools to fix where you're at. And that gets you really, really sad and depressed to the point of paralysis. And you have all sorts of nasty, naughty thoughts coming your way. Maybe I should just end it all by jumping from a bridge. I should take a lot of pills. Maybe I should just, whatever. And the reason why I'm saying all this is because it's normal. It's natural. It's organic. You know, this is what happens when you go into a street not knowing that it's a dead end. And every street you go into, it's a dead end. After a while, you just park the car somewhere and say, where can I go? What do I need to do? I've tried, like, 50 different avenues, and they go nowhere. Something really, really happens at this space, stage, which is the following. And this is the tough part. For the first time, you have to make a decision that you become aware when you get sad, and you have to make a decision to put your physical body in a physical environment where you have a different set of forces wrestling with the sadness that live inside you. And you have to manipulate yourself. I mean, you have to advertise yourself a different set of billboards, images, emotions. If you do this over and over again, hopefully, if you're lucky, and there's always the element of luck. I mean, one of the awful things about someone like Frederick Nietzsche is that, you know, he comes up with this idea you should say yes to life. I don't want to say yes to life. Life sucks. You know, I can say yes to life if I'm creative, if I have power, if I can overcome cancer, if I can overcome how pathetic and poor I am as a human being. But if day in and day out, I'm just suffering, there's no reason for me to say yes. I'd rather just say no. And the other problem, I would say, is that the moment you decide to make any changes to your life, you will have no friends left. Usually, people who are depressed have no friends. And by the time you get to this place where they have no friends, it's really difficult to trust anyone who's willing to help you in any shape or form. The Danish philosopher Søren Kierkegaard, you gotta take a leap of faith. Just take a leap of faith. You don't know me. You may not like me. This is just a hypothetical. If I say come to the house for dinner and meet my wife and my family and my parents who are all coming here today, I say, oh, I don't even know this guy. I can't trust him. Go there for what? Leap of faith. Just say yes. And who knows? Maybe my mom will say something to you. Maybe you'll gravitate towards my mom. Maybe my dad. Maybe my entire tribe. And all of a sudden, you'll continuously send me texts or emails. I guess having a gathering again. Leap of faith. There is nothing else anyone can do. The truth is, whenever you make a sacrifice, any kind of sacrifice, it really is a leap of faith. The moment you walk out of your house, the truth is, you may get run over by a car. You know, the sun may just kind of come down and just sit on you. Anything can happen when you take a leap of faith. And this is no different. You know, reinventing yourself is a leap of faith because you have no idea what the outcome is going to be. But you can make a leap of faith in the dark in the sense that you can just say, I hate myself and just sit there and hope that something will change. It never happens.
